5G-Advanced AI/ML Beam Management:
Performance Evaluation with Integrated ML Models
Nalin Jayaweera1,2, Andrea Bonfante1, Mark Schamberger1, Amir Mehdi Ahmadian Tehrani1,
Tachporn Sanguanpuak1, Preetish Tilak1, Keeth Jayasinghe1, Frederick W. Vook1, Nandana Rajatheva2
1Nokia Standards, 2University of Oulu
Abstract—The legacy beam management (BM) procedure in
5G introduces higher measurement and reporting overheads for
larger beam codebooks resulting in higher power consumption
of user equipment (UEs). Hence, the 3rd generation partnership
project (3GPP) studied the use of artificial intelligence (AI)
and machine learning (ML) in the air interface to reduce the
overhead associated with the legacy BM procedure. The usage
of AI/ML in BM is mainly discussed with regard to spatial-
domain beam prediction (SBP) and time-domain beam prediction
(TBP). In this study, we discuss different sub-use cases of SBP
and TBP and evaluate the beam prediction accuracy of AI/ML
models designed for each sub-use case along with AI/ML model
generalization aspects. Moreover, a comprehensive system-level
performance evaluation is presented in terms of user throughput
with integrated AI/ML models to a 3GPP-compliant system-level
simulator. Based on user throughput evaluations, we present
AI/ML BM design guidelines for the deployment of lightweight,
low-complexity AI/ML models discussed in this study.
Index Terms—Beam Management, AI/ML, Spatial-domain
Beam Prediction, Time-domian Beam Prediction, 3GPP, 5G-
Advanced
I. INTRODUCTION
F
IVE G-Advanced (5G-Advanced) wireless networks her-
ald the prospect of a thoroughly interconnected and
mobile society characterized by the expectation of high
throughput, energy efficient, immersive and data-driven ra-
dio access networks (RANs) [1], [2]. Coupled with data-
driven approaches, RAN has the potential to develop pre-
dictive capabilities that learn from the environment through
the use of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning
(ML) techniques [3]. Therefore, many companies are presently
integrating AI/ML technologies into the existing 5G network
and devices, with AI/ML emerging as a pivotal technology
cornerstone for 5G-Advanced once standardized within the
air interface [4]–[6]. AI/ML 5G-Advanced can assist the
transition to the next generation of networking, 6G, which
is envisioned to feature an even more pronounced usage of
AI/ML technologies in mobile communications as inherently
designed based on AI-native interface [7]–[9].
The recently concluded 3rd generation partnership project
(3GPP) Rel-18, has studied the support of a new AI/ML-
enabled radio interface for the next cellular systems [10].
Beam management (BM) represents one of the different pilot
use cases for applying the AI/ML model in the new radio
(NR) air interface. These pilot use cases aim to identify a
common AI/ML framework, including functional requirements
of AI/ML architecture, which could be used in subsequent
releases and will pave the way for the design of native AI/ML
6G networks. The motivation behind the study of this use case
stems from the increasing demand for efficient beam prediction
schemes. One of the primary objectives of the 3GPP Rel-18
study item (SI) was to investigate the application of AI/ML-
driven BM schemes for reducing the measurement overhead
– providing more flexibility for beam measurements and a
larger room for the user equipment (UE) power saving – while
maintaining comparable end-to-end performance of legacy BM
procedures.
In the legacy BM procedure, the gNodeB (gNB) configures
UEs to measure reference signal (RSs) resources including
synchronization signal block (SSB) and channel state infor-
mation RSs (CSI-RS). UEs measure and provide feedback to
a gNB to assist the legacy beam alignment process performed
with P1, P2 and P3 procedures [11]. In the initial beam-pair
establishment procedure (P1), gNB transmits SSB resources
employing a beam codebook referred to as SSB beams, and
the UE measures the reference signal received power (RSRP)
of each SSB beam with receiver (RX) beams and reports
the strongest set of RS identifiers and corresponding RSRP
measurements. The beam refinement procedure (P2) finds the
UE-specific CSI-RS beams by transmitting CSI-RS beams,
which are more directional and provide higher received signal
strength than SSB beams. Hence, CSI-RS beams are used
for downlink (DL) data transmission. In the receiver beam
refinement procedure (P3), gNB transmits the same transmitter
(TX) beam over different time instances, and UE measures
determine the best RX beam. The large number of beams
included in TX and RX codebooks leads to performing a
large number of measurements for determining the best TX-
RX beams.
The legacy BM process is time-inefficient and not scalable
when the size of antenna arrays increases. ML algorithms can
replace sequential beam sweeping by predicting beams in both
time and spatial domains as proposed in 3GPP Rel-18 BM
use cases. The scope of spatial-domain beam prediction (BM-
Case1) is to predict the best DL TX beam or DL TX/RX
beam pairs in different spatial locations. Conversely, time-
domain beam predictions (BM-Case2) aim to predict the
best DL TX beam or DL TX/RX beam pairs to use for
future time instances. It has been shown that ML algorithms
enable prediction of the serving beam for different spatial
locations and time instances, thereby avoiding the necessity
for exhaustive beam measurements [12]–[14].
arXiv:2404.15326v1  [eess.SP]  6 Apr 2024
A. Relevant Work
The application of AI/ML for BM has attracted many
research efforts in recent years. In [15], the legacy BM proce-
dures and associated challenges are explained while presenting
future trends such as AI/ML-based BM to overcome those
challenges. Additionally, many studies and findings account
for AI/ML BM in the literature. In [16], an overview is
presented on the 3GPP Rel-18 studies on AI/ML to improve
the 5G NR air interface and discuss the AI/ML BM framework
and its functionality. Similarly, in-depth discussions related to
AI/ML-based BM procedures and the standardization aspects
are presented in [17].
Many studies account for spatial-domain and time-domain
beam prediction in the literature [18]. [19] investigates an
ML-based BM scheme with less beam measurement over-
head. The authors present a convolutional neural network
(CNN) based ML model for beam pair prediction for a fixed
beam measurement configuration, and another ML model
to address the generalization aspect. Next, transfer learning-
based enhancement is proposed to reduce ML model training
time and data requirements. However, this work explores the
ML-based spatial-domain beam predictions and evaluation is
limited for beam prediction accuracy-related key performance
indicators (KPIs). AI/ML-based time-domain prediction algo-
rithms are presented in [20] with beam prediction accuracy
and system evaluations. Additionally, the proposed models are
integrated into a 3GPP-compliant gNB and a UE to evaluate
the model performance in a test setup. The study [21] performs
time-domain beam prediction and evaluates beam prediction
accuracy-related KPIs to evaluate important aspects such as
UE speed and required historical data volume to make better
decisions. Wang et al. [22] study spatial-domain beam predic-
tion and time-domain beam pair prediction, and show AI-based
algorithms outperform non-AI/ML based solutions using beam
pair prediction accuracy. Among all AI/ML-based beam track-
ing methods, [23] proposes a Bayesian optimization-based best
beam tracking technique that requires no or little training
on historical data. Furthermore, authors in [24] propose a
AI/ML model activation and deactivation framework to reduce
unnecessary ML model switching by 10%.
In addition to the RS measurement-based beam predictions,
assisted information such as location data is used to improve
AI/ML prediction accuracy. A recurrent neural network (RNN)
based beam-pair prediction algorithm is proposed in [25]
which used beam measurements as well as sensor data to
enhance the prediction accuracy. Light detection and ranging
(LiDAR) sensor information assisted time-domain beam pre-
diction is proposed in [26] that reduced RS overhead by 13.2%
for a best beam prediction accuracy of 88.7%.
Most of the available studies explore spatial-domain or time-
domain beam prediction and evaluation is mainly performed
with beam prediction accuracy-related KPIs. A few works
have considered system-level performance evaluation. System-
level simulation (SLS) studies based on 3GPP NR Rel-16
were performed in [27]. More recently, the work proposed
in [20], focused on SLS evaluation of time-domain beam
prediction adopting the latest UE mobility and orientation
model considered in 3GPP 5G-Advanced NR Rel-18.
B. Contributions
This paper presents a comprehensive analysis consider-
ing system-level performance evaluation methodologies for
spatial-domain beam prediction and time-domain beam pre-
diction by integrating the ML models studied in 3GPP Rel-18
study item (SI) into a 3GPP-based system-level simulator. The
work considered in [20] has primarily focused on time-domain
scenarios, overlooking the spatial-domain BM use case that
may be more commonly applied in practical environments,
where most of the UEs are stationary. As a result, there is a
growing need for more comprehensive studies that show the
effectiveness of ML techniques to accurately predict beams
both in the spatial-domain and time-domain. This paper ad-
dresses this need by proposing novel results that consider
both spatial-domain and time-domain beam prediction models.
We integrate these schemes into a state-of-the-art system-level
simulator and we evaluate them using the latest 5G-Advanced
Rel-18 assumptions. The performance evaluation is not limited
to the beam prediction accuracy, as compared to most of the
existing prior works, but considers system-level KPIs such as
user throughput and measurement overhead which shows the
realistic gains of using AI/ML for BM. The primary aim is
to provide new insights about the link between ML model
performance and system-level performance. The findings are
summarized into design guidelines to select suitable AI/ML
models for UEs with different channel conditions. Finally, we
highlighted future research directions based on the observa-
tions of this study.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
we discuss the use cases of AI/ML-based BM with problem
formulations. AI/ML BM procedures are presented in Section
III while the simulation framework is explained in Section IV
with ML model descriptions and beam prediction KPIs. In
Section V, we present an in-depth analysis of the simulation
results including beam prediction accuracy and system level
performance. Then we present AI/ML BM design guidelines
based on the evaluation results. Finally, we conclude the paper
in Section VI with the main insights of this study.
II. AI/ML BASED BM USE-CASES
We consider a network deployment of gNBs each one
serving multiple UEs according to an NR system operating
in FR2 (frequency range 2). Both gNBs and UEs use analog
beamforming with a single radio frequency (RF) chain con-
nected to multiple antenna elements to form beams in spatial
directions according to the beamforming vectors bx where
x ∈{tx, rx} is a notation to indicate the transmitter and
receiver [28]. The gNBs and UEs are equipped with uniform
planar arrays (UPAs) having antenna spacing λ/2 and formed
by a number of antennas Mx = M H
x × M V
x
with spacing
dH, dV in the horizontal and vertical directions where M V
x
and M H
x
denote the vertical and the horizontal dimension
of the UPAs, respectively. Additionally, θtx and ϕtx denote
the azimuth and elevation angle of departure (AoD), and
similarly θrx and ϕrx denote the azimuth and elevation angle
of arrival (AoA). The TX beamforming vector btx(θtx, ϕtx) or
RX beamforming vector brx(θrx, ϕrx) used to steer the beam
is generalized and expressed as bx(θx, ϕx) that can be defined
as following M H
x × M V
x matrix:
1
p
MH
x
[1, e−j2π dH
λ sin(ϕx)cos(θx), ..., e−j2π dH
λ (MH
x −1)sin(ϕx)cos(θx)]⊤⊗
1
p
MV
x
[1, e−j2π dV
λ cos(ϕx), ..., e−j2π dV
λ (MV
x −1)cos(ϕx)],
(1)
where j = √−1, ⊗denotes the Kronecker product and [.]⊤
performs the transpose operation.
Next, we consider a vector of TX beam codebook composed
of Ntx = N A
tx × N E
tx beams, which can be defined as
CBtx ={btx(θ1
tx, ϕ1
tx), btx(θ2
tx, ϕ1
tx), ..., btx(θNA
tx
tx , ϕ1
tx),
btx(θ1
tx, ϕ2
tx), ..., btx(θNA
tx
tx , ϕNE
tx
tx )},
(2)
where subscripts A and E denote the azimuth and elevation
directions of different AoDs [29]. Similarly, we define an
RX codebook CBrx composed of Nrx = N A
rx × N E
rx beams
designed with different AoAs. In general, a TX beam is
identified with beam index i ∈{1, 2, ..., Ntx} and RX beam
index i′ ∈{1, 2, ..., Nrx}. At a given time instant t, the DL
received signal at the UE from the connected gNB can be
expressed as
y(t) =
√
Ps(t)b∗
rxH(t)btx + b∗
rxz(t),
(3)
where (.)∗denotes the conjugate transpose of a vector, P is
the total power of the gNB, s(t) represents the transmitted
signal such that E[|s(t)|2] = 1, H(t) ∈CMrx×Mtx is the
time-varying gain/phase response between TX and RX for an
orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) system
[30], where we have neglected the dependency on subcarrier
for simplicity, z(t) ∈CMrx is the additive white Gaussian
noise with zero mean and variance σ2
z, btx and brx are
the TX and RX beamforming vectors adopted by the gNB
and UE, respectively, while UE measures the RSRP across
the bandwidth occupied by RSs, which can be expressed as
r(t) = |y(t)|2. To obtain the quality of DL TX beams in CBtx,
we define the vector of RSRP measurements associated with
all the Ntx RS resources as R = [r1(t), r2(t), ..., rNtx(t)]. In
the following subsections, we consider RSRP measurements
for a set of TX beams denoted as Set B. For spatial-domain
beam prediction (SBP), we use the vector of RSRP values
measured at the time instant t expressed as RSetB, whereas,
for time-domian beam prediction (TBP), we use the history
of RSRP measurements, including past time instants, e.g.,
t −L, ..., t −1, and expressed with vectors of RSRPs as
Rt−L
SetB, ..., Rt−1
SetB, Rt
SetB.
A. Spatial-domain Beam Prediction
In SBP, the UE measures a first set of TX beams defined as
Set B which are included in a codebook CBtx,B of dimension
Ntx,B and predicts a second set of Tx beams defined as Set A
included in a codebook CBtx,A of dimension Ntx,A, where Set
B has a lower dimension than Set A, i.e., Ntx,B ⩽Ntx,A. In
the network, this is realized by the gNB transmitting a group
of DL RS resources associated with Set B beams while the
UE performs Ntx,B measurements to determine the vector of
RSRPs RSetB to be used as input for the AI/ML model. At
each time instant t, the AI/ML model predicts K beams from
Set A, given the measurements of Set B beams used as input.
The best K, i.e., Top-K beams indices predicted by the AI/ML
model can be expressed as
ˆi1,ˆi2, ...,ˆiK
	
=
arg max
i∈{1,2,...,Ntx,A}
 fW (RSetB)

,
(4)
where the prediction function fW (.) depends on the AI/ML
model training parameters W and is used to predict the Top-1
beam in Set A, i.e. the beam having the highest RSRP in Set
A. The operator arg max(.) selects the Top-K beam indices
having the highest probability to be the Top-1 beam in Set
A, where the index ˆi1 identifies the beam having the highest
probability, while the ˆiK identifies the one having the K-th
highest probability. Next, we present the two alternatives of
SBP studied in 3GPP: Alt. i) Set B is different from Set A
and Alt. ii) Set B is a subset of Set A [10].
1) Set B is Different to Set A: In this alternative, Set B
beams may have different characteristics like beam shape,
width and set of angular directions in comparison to the beams
in Set A. For instance, we consider that Set B are wide SSB
beams generally used for transmitting synchronization signals
and providing coverage whereas Set A are refined CSI-RS
beams used for improving the SINR at the UE. To note that
a wide SSB beam in Set B may be generated by the linear
combination of adjacent CSI-RS beams in Set A as shown
in Fig 1 where one SSB beam encompasses three adjacent
CSI-RS beams in azimuth direction and two CSI-RS beams
in elevation direction [31]. Thus, given the input constituted by
the measurements of SSB beams, the AI/ML model provides
as output the Top-K predicted CSI-RS beam indices.
RSRPs of measured  
SSB beams of Set B
AI/ML model
Predicted DL TX beam 
indices of Set A
Elevation
Azimuth
Ƹ𝑖1
Ƹ𝑖3
Ƹ𝑖2
Set A
𝐑𝑆𝑒𝑡 𝐵
SSB 1
SSB 2
SSB 3
SSB 4
Fig. 1. Top-K TX beam prediction in SBP where Set B is different to Set A.
2) Set B is a Subset of Set A: In this other alternative shown
in Fig 2, Set B is a subset of the Set A beams. For instance,
we consider that Set B are part of the refined CSI-RS beams
which partially cover the full set of refined CSI-RS beams
belonging to Set A. Therefore, the gNB transmits CSI-RS
resources corresponding to Set B beams, while the UE uses
the measurements from CSI-RS beams for input to the AI/ML
model to obtain the Top-K predicted CSI-RS beam indices like
for the previous alternative with Set B different from Set A.
The selection criteria of Set B beams from Set A determines
the performance of the AI/ML model. Thus, in this work, we
define a CSI-RS beam codebook for Set A with a fixed Set B
selection pattern such that Set B covers different azimuth and
elevation angle directions of Set A beams.
Fig. 2. Top-K TX beam prediction in SBP where Set B is a subset of Set A.
B. Time-domain Beam Prediction
In TBP shown in Fig. 3, the AI/ML model considers as
input historical RSRP measurements of Set B and predicts
the Top-K strongest beams in Set A to be used at future
time instances. 3GPP studied different alternatives like in SBP,
however, our focus will be limited to the cases where Set B
and Set A are both formed by refined CSI-RS beams and
Set B is included or the same as Set A. We consider as the
AI/ML model input the history of RSRP measurements of the
CSI-RS beams within an observation window that includes lo
CSI-RS measurements. The AI/ML model provides the Top-
K predicted CSI-RS beam indices for one or more future
time instances within a prediction window of dimension lp.
The Top-1 TX beam predictions of the AI/ML model can be
expressed as
ˆi
t+1
1
, ...,ˆi
t+lp
1
	
=
arg max
i∈{1,2,...,Ntx,A}
 gW ({Rt−lo+1
SetB
, ..., Rt
SetB})

(5)
where the prediction function gW (.) depends on the AI/ML
model parameters W, Rt
SetB denotes the measured RSRPs of
Set B at time t. Eq. (5) defines the Top-1 predicted beam.
Yet similar to SBP, the Top-K predicted beams for time t + x
can be expressed as [ˆi
t+x
1
,ˆi
t+x
2
, ...,ˆi
t+x
K ] where the index ˆi
t+x
1
identifies the beam having the highest probability, while the
ˆi
t+x
K
identifies the one having the K-th highest probability at
time t + x.
III. AI/ML BM FRAMEWORK
In this section, we discuss the AI/ML model operations
for SBP and TBP AI/ML models, which can be trained
and deployed at the gNB (NW-sided models) or UE (UE-
sided models) as depicted in Fig. 4. Moreover, 3GPP Rel-18
SI considered aspects related to the inference, performance
monitoring and data collection, which are described in clause
7.1.3 of technical report (TR) 38.843. As the models discussed
in SBP and TBP require UE measurements and reporting
configurations to support AI/ML models in different stages,
Fig. 3. Top-K TX beam prediction in TBP where Set B is a subset of Set A.
most of the aspects discussed in 3GPP focus on introducing
enhancements of reporting configuration, measurement RS
resource set configuration and overhead reduction of beams
reporting [10].
(a) NW-sided AI/ML model
(b) UE-sided AI/ML model
Fig. 4. AI/ML BM procedures.
A. Data Collection for AI/ML Model Training
Data collection for model training may reuse the existing
beam measurement and reporting frameworks. For instance,
the gNB configures the UE with a CSI reporting configuration
to perform measurements of Set A and Set B beams as shown
in step 1 of Fig. 4a and Fig. 4b. In step 2 of Fig. 4a and
Fig. 4b, the measurements are collected across various UEs
and time occasions may be uploaded to a server for offline
model training [10]. In both SBP and TBP, the UE measures
RS resources corresponding to different TX beams using
an optimal RX beam determined by previous measurements.
Also, the UE may filter the instantaneous RSRP measurements
to mitigate the effects of fast fading with a Layer-1 (L1) filter
and collect L1-RSRP measurements. The following differences
may depend on whether UE-sided or NW-sided models are
used.
For a UE-sided model, data is collected by measuring the
RSs corresponding to Set A and Set B beams, where Set A
measurements to derive the best beam index to be used as
the label and L1-RSRP measurements associated with Set B
beams to be used as input data. For the NW-sided model, the
UE is configured to measure Set A and Set B beams and report
the best beam index in Set A beams to be used as the label
in addition to the L1-RSRP measurements of Set B beams for
the input data.
5G NR currently supports beam reporting with a maxi-
mum of four beams in a reporting instance [32], yet for
the NW-sided model, AI/ML-based beam prediction requires
enhancing the reporting to potentially support the reporting
of all Set A beam measurements in one reporting instance.
In this regard, the reporting overhead for NW-sided model
training may be significantly increased compared to the UE-
sided model training. On the other hand, the network (NW)
has a better awareness of the conditions such as beam patterns
and NW antenna configuration associated with the collected
data compared to UE.
B. AI/ML Model Inference
Once the trained AI/ML model is deployed at UE or NW,
the gNB configures the UE to measure Set B beams to be used
as input to the model during inference. As shown in steps 3-4
in Fig. 4b for UE-sided AI/ML model, the UE predicts Top-K
beams in Set A based on L1-RSRP measurements associated
with Set B and then reports the predicted Top-K beams to the
gNB. For the NW-sided AI/ML model, as illustrated in steps
3-5 in Fig. 4a, the UE is configured to report all Ntx,B of Set B
beam measurements to be used as input of the AI/ML model
for inference. Similar enhancements to beam measurements
reporting described in Sec. III-A for the data collection may
also be required for NW-sided model inference.
After the UE performs inference and reports the predicted
Top-K beams to gNB or after the gNB obtains the predicted
Top-K beams based on inference, the gNB may optionally
perform an additional step of refined measurements of the Top-
K predicted beams. Alternatively, the predicted Top-K beam
can be used directly without a step of refined measurements to
make informed decisions about transmission control informa-
tion (TCI) state activation and indication to the UE. At step 5
of Fig. 4a (step 6 in 4b), a DL control message including the
TCI state is transmitted to indicate the DL TX beam to use
for receiving DL channels.
C. AI/ML Performance Monitoring
For various reasons such as sudden changes in channel
conditions or other changes to the NW or UE configurations,
both the UE-sided and the NW-sided models may not always
provide accurate predictions. Performance monitoring is used
to detect any degradation in the AI/ML model’s performance
during such events [10]. Performance monitoring may be
performed at the NW side or UE-side. Alternatively may be
assisted by the UE. All options are applicable for SBP and
TBP. In the following, we provide an example of performance
monitoring.
For NW-side performance monitoring of a UE model shown
in step 6 of Fig. 4b, the gNB configures an RS resource set
to be monitoring RS resources, where UE measures these
monitoring RS resources and reports back to the gNB the
measurements corresponding to Set A. After receiving the
measurements and beam prediction reports, the gNB can
calculate relevant KPIs, e.g., beam prediction accuracy, RSRP
difference between RSRP measured and RSRP predicted, and
other KPIs discussed in Sec. IV-D. Moreover, for UE-sided
performance monitoring, UE calculate relevant KPI and report
to gNB to make a decision.
For NW-side performance monitoring with beam prediction
at NW shown in step 7 of Fig. 4a, the gNB determines the
relevant KPIs based on the measurements reported by the UE
and the beam predictions obtained from the NW-side model.
After evaluation of the performance metrics, an AI/ML
model may continue to be used if its performance is deemed
acceptable, otherwise beam operations may be switched back
to the legacy non-ML BM procedure. Control signalling may
be used for AI/ML model switching (including fallback to
legacy) based on performance monitoring results.
IV. SIMULATION FRAMEWORK
In this section, we discuss the system-level simulation
methodology and assumptions based on 3GPP 5G-Advanced
NR Rel-18. We explain the AI/ML model training and we
go through the steps of AI/ML model integration. Then, we
list the AI/ML model evaluation KPIs and the system-level
performance KPIs considered by Rel-18 SI to evaluate the
performance of the AI/ML models. In the following our focus
is mainly on NW-sided models (NS = Ntx,A), however, sim-
ilar observations can be made when evaluating the UE-sided
models although the signaling configuration for measurement
and reporting is less obvious and will be specified in Rel-19
work item (WI).
A. System-Level Simulation Assumptions
We use a proprietary simulator calibrated to the 3GPP
reference scenarios and already used in the past for other
3GPP-related studies [33]. We configure the simulator with the
3GPP 5G-Advanced NR Rel-18 assumptions with an Urban
Macro scenario and adopt the following workflow: At first, we
use the extracted simulation statistics for generating synthetic
data for training the AI/ML models offline. Later we integrate
the AI/ML models in the simulation loop, and we simulate a
second campaign for obtaining the AI/ML model performance
KPIs and system-level KPIs. Table III summarizes the 3GPP-
based SLS assumptions considered for the data collection
and performance evaluation. In addition to the common SLS
assumptions stated in Table III, SBP focus on quasi-static UEs
with a speed of 3 kmph, whereas TBP consider a UE speed of
30 kmph. Moreover, we use a 64-beam CSI-RS codebook and
an 8-beam SSB codebook for SBP studies whereas a 32-beam
CSI-RS codebook is used for TBP evaluations.
B. AI/ML Models and Training
We propose to use an AI/ML model based on neural
network (NN) to predict the index of the best beam based
Table I: Summary of the AI/ML models used for the different use cases
Model Name
Alternative
Model Type
Model Input
Model Output
SBP1 Ntx,B Ntx,A
BM-Case1
Set B is different
to Set A
DNN
L1-RSRP of Ntx,B beams and
beam indices for Ntx,B = 16
Probability of Ntx,A beams being
Top-1 beam for Ntx,A = 64
SBP2
Ntx,B Ntx,A
BM-Case1
Set B is subset of
Set A
CNN-DNN
L1-RSRP of Ntx,B beams and
beam indices for
Ntx,B = {8, 16, 32}
Probability of Ntx,A beams being
Top-1 beam for Ntx,A = 64
TBP Ntx,B Ntx,A
BM-Case2
Set B is
same/subset of
Set A
LSTM-CNN
Historic L1-RSRP of Ntx,B
beams for
Ntx,B = {8, 16, 32}
Probability of Ntx,A beams being
Top-1 beam for a future time
instance when Ntx,A = 32
on the objective functions stated in Eq. (4) and Eq. (5). A
summary of AI/ML models used for both SBP and TBP is
presented in Table I. For SBP with Set B is different from
Set A, we consider a deep neural network (DNN) architecture
as more complex architectures have not shown significant
advantages when considering a limited set of SSB beams as
input. On the other hand, for SBP with Set B is a subset of Set
A, we adopt an AI/ML model with a CNN-DNN architecture
that shows better results when considering a larger set of
CSI-RS beams as input. For the TBP use case, we adopt a
long short-term memory (LSTM) based on CNN architecture
to better leverage the time dependencies of measurements in
the historical data used as input of the model. The values
considered for the observation window and prediction window
are lo = 5 and lp = 1, respectively. Finally, the complexity of
the model is later provided in Sec. V-F.
The dataset for model training is obtained from 200 network
drops with 42000 UEs in total. We split the data between
training, validation and testing using the ratio 0.8 : 0.1 : 0.1.
We use the “Adam” model training optimizer and we con-
sider the “StepLR” as the learning rate scheduler set with
an initial learning rate of 0.01. For training, we adopt a
categorical cross-entropy loss function which can be expressed
as L = −PN
n
PNtx
k
yn,k log(pn,k), where N is the number of
training samples, yn,k is the ground-truth for the n-th sample,
pn,k is the probability to predict the ground-truth for the n-th
sample, given by a softmax function.
C. Integration of AI/ML Model in SLS
Fig. 5 illustrates the beam measurement and reporting
framework developed in the SLS where the grey area rep-
resents NW-side functionalities and the white area presents
UE-side functionalities. Several features have been introduced
to support the data collection for AI/ML model training, model
inference, and model performance monitoring. Starting from
the top of Fig. 5, we describe the different steps related to the
NW-sided models as follows:
• First, to generate the dataset needed for AI/ML model
training at the NW-side, gNB transmit Set A and UE
measures L1-RSRP of each TX beam with different RX
beams for both UE panels. The UE determines the L1-
RSRP measurement for each TX beam based on the
RX beam selection criteria, e.g. considering the “best
RX” beam which provides the highest L1-RSRP assumed
in this study. The TX beams with the corresponding
L1-RSRP measurements are reported to the gNB that
performs data collection.
• Next, for the AI/ML model inference with Set B is a
subset of Set A case, the UE refines instantaneous RSRP
measurements corresponding to Set B by applying an
averaging filter which takes Set B pattern as input. If
Set B is different to Set A, the UE measures Set A
as well as Set B at different time instances. For both
cases, the resulting RSetB is sorted based on filtered L1-
RSRP measurements, and the Ns strongest beams and
corresponding L1-RSRP measurements are reported to
the gNB.
• During the AI/ML model inference, the AI/ML model
takes the measurement reports and predicts the Top-K
TX beam indices. An additional step is considered for
the TBP AI/ML model inference where the measurement
reports received at the gNB during the observation win-
dow are stored for the duration lo in a buffer before using
them for inference. Also, the predicted Top-K TX beam
indices from a TBP AI/ML model are stored in memory
for lp time instances as the prediction is valid for t + lp
future time instances. Based on the Top-1 predicted valid
for time t, the gNB indicates to the UE which TX beam
to use for DL data transmission.
• Finally, for monitoring the NW-sided model performance,
the same measurements determined in step 1 are used.
To note that in case Set A is different from Set B, the
gNB transmits, and the UE measures and reports Set
B separately, similar to Set A for data collection and
performance monitoring functionalities.
The same framework can be utilized for integrating a UE-
sided AI/ML model. In that case, RSetB is taken as the input
to the AI/ML model and UE reports predicted Top-K TX
beam indices to a gNB. Considering the ideal report, the
performance of the UE-sided AI/ML model is equivalent to
the ones obtained for the NW-sided AI/ML models evaluated
in this study.
D. Evaluation KPIs
3GPP agreed to evaluate the performance of AI/ML-based
BM with two KPI options that include beam prediction
accuracy-related KPIs and system-level related KPIs [10].
In beam prediction accuracy-related KPIs, the Top-K accu-
racy evaluates the percentage of predictions that observed the
Fig. 5. Illustration of beam measurement and reporting framework for a NW-sided model in SBP where Set B is a subset of Set A.
best TX beam in one of the Top-K predicted beams. Thus, the
Top-K accuracy can be expressed as
ATop-K =
K
X
k=1
1(ˆik = i),
(6)
where ˆik is the index of the K-th beam in Top-K predicted
beams, i is the Top-1 genie-aided beam and 1(.) is the
indicator function. If ˆik = i, then 1(.) = 1 and 0 otherwise.
Moreover, the Eq. (6) reduces to Top-1 accuracy when K = 1
which indicates the best TX beam prediction accuracy. Even
though, ATop-K is low, the predicted TX beam can still be used
if it provides an acceptable beam gain.
The L1-RSRP difference between the Top-1 predicted beam
and the Top-1 genie-aided beam provides insight into the beam
gain of the prediction which can be expressed as
eRSRP = Ri −Rˆi,
(7)
where Ri denotes the L1-RSRP of the Top-1 genie-aided beam
at one instant. Similarly, Rˆi represents L1-RSRP of predicted
Top-1 TX beam. Furthermore, the prediction of the AI/ML
model is reliable if eRSRP is less than 1 dB [10]. Hence, the
beam prediction accuracy with 1 dB margin for the error is
defined as ATop-1, 1dB margin = 1((Ri−Rˆi) < 1 dB), that defines
the accuracy of the predicted best beam having an L1-RSRP
error less than 1 dB. In this work, we evaluate the AI/ML
model accuracy using the above-mentioned KPIs which can
be used as a model performance monitoring KPI in the model
inference stage.
In addition to beam prediction accuracy-related KPIs,
system-level related KPIs are needed to verify the gains of
the AI/ML-based beam predictions in contrast to legacy BM
procedures. Average throughput and cell-edge UE throughput
indicate whether the AI/ML-based beam predictions can be
used in the network. Furthermore, the key motivation of
the AI/ML-based BM, i.e. the RS measurement overhead
reduction (MOR) can be formulated according to the following
conditions [10]
• MOR = 1 −Ntx,B
Ntx,A for SBP.
• MOR = 1 −
loNtx,B
(lo+lp)Ntx,A for TBP.
V. RESULTS AND PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, we evaluate the beam prediction accuracy-
related KPIs and the system-level performance-related KPIs
for the AI/ML models trained for SBP and TBP. For perfor-
mance evaluation, we use ten simulation drops that are not
used for AI/ML model training and we compare the results
with respect to baseline cases provided in each subsection.
A. Evaluation of Different Alternatives in SBP
This subsection evaluates a wide-to-narrow prediction
model (denoted by SBP1) with respect to a narrow-to-narrow
prediction model (denoted by SBP2), where SBP1 and SBP2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
K
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
CDF
SBP1_16_64
SBP2_16_64
Fig. 6. Evaluation of Top-K prediction accuracy (ATop-K) for varying K.
0
2
4
6
8
10
eRSRP [dB]
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
CDF
SBP1_16_64
SBP2_16_64
1-dB error margin
Fig. 7. Evaluation of RSRP difference between predicted and genie-aided best
beam’s.
models consider SSB beam codebook of size 16 and a refined
CSI-RS beam codebook of size 16 as Set B, respectively.
Both models consider a refined CSI-RS codebook of size
64 as Set A. Fig. 6 shows the Top-K prediction accuracy
of wide-to-narrow prediction, which is evaluated compared to
narrow-to-narrow prediction. Results show that the narrow-to-
narrow prediction outperforms the wide-to-narrow prediction.
Additionally, the Top-1 prediction accuracy of wide-to-narrow
prediction degrades 17% compared to narrow-to-narrow pre-
diction.
Fig. 7 illustrates the performance evaluation of the models
on L1-RSRP difference between Top-1 genie-aided and Top-
1 predicted beam’s. As it can be seen, both wide-to-narrow
prediction and narrow-to-narrow prediction achieve more than
90% accuracy within eRSRP < 3 dB. However, wide-to-
narrow prediction degrades approximately 15% the Top-1
prediction accuracy with 1 dB margin of the narrow-to-narrow
prediction, which achieves 90%.
The results depicted in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 show that the
prediction of the strongest refined CSI-RS beam is more
difficult considering SSB beam measurements as input than
using a subset of the CSI-RS codebook measurements as
input to the model. This is because SSB beams cover a
wide area encompassing multiple CSI-RS beams. Thus, the
variation of input L1-RSRP distribution of SSB measurements
is less relevant for the AI/ML model-based narrow beam
prediction compared to the L1-RSRP distribution of the CSI-
5
50
95
Percentile [%]
85
90
95
100
105
User throughput ratio [%]
SBP1_16_64
SBP2_16_64
Fig. 8. Evaluation of UE throughput ratio of 5-th, 50-th and 95-th percentiles
with respect to absolute UE throughput of [0.52, 1.59, 3.13] × 104 Mbps of
narrow-to-narrow beam prediction, respectively.
RS measurements.
Fig. 8 analyzes the behaviour of the UE throughput at the
5-th, 50-th, and 95-th percentile of the CDF. The ratio is calcu-
lated with respect to narrow-to-narrow prediction throughput
performance. For the 5-th percentile of the CDF, cell-edge
UEs experience 8.2% UE throughput degradation with wide-
to-narrow prediction compared to cell-edge UEs who used
narrow-to-narrow prediction. The UE throughput of wide-
to-narrow prediction matches the performance of narrow-to-
narrow prediction for all other UEs except cell-edge UEs.
Moreover, the wide-to-narrow prediction model eliminates
the P2 procedure as the model requires L1-RSRP measure-
ments obtained from SSB beams. Thus, measurement overhead
reduction in P2 is 100%. Additionally, the performance of
wide-to-narrow prediction model seems reasonable and can
be used if it meets the accuracy levels required by the NW.
However, the comparison of beam prediction accuracy-related
KPIs and UE throughput performance shows that narrow-
to-narrow prediction outperforms wide-to-narrow prediction.
Therefore in the following subsection, we evaluate different
varieties of narrow-to-narrow prediction models by varying
the Set B size.
B. Evaluation of SBP: Set B is a Subset of Set A
The performance of the narrow-to-narrow beam prediction
is evaluated with three AI/ML models with input Set B
sizes of 8, 16, and 32 for an output Set A size of 64. The
performance of each AI/ML model is compared with a non-
AI/ML baseline which selects the strongest beam among the
reported Set B beams, which also belongs to Set A (denoted
by BL Ntx,B Ntx,A).
Fig. 9 compares the Top-K prediction accuracy of AI/ML
models for K ⩽10 and Top-K prediction accuracy reduces as
the Set B size reduces for any K. Narrow-to-narrow prediction
with Ntx,B = 8 experiences a significant degradation in terms
of Top-K prediction accuracy for lower K values compared
to narrow-to-narrow prediction with Ntx,B = 16. However,
narrow-to-narrow prediction with Ntx,B = 16 and Ntx,B =
32 achieved a Top-1 prediction accuracy above 75% and all
three AI/ML models achieved ATop-4 greater than 90%. Results
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
K
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
CDF
SBP2_8_64
SBP2_16_64
SBP2_32_64
Fig. 9. Evaluation of Top-K prediction accuracy (ATop-K) for varying K.
confirm that as Ntx,B/Ntx,A reduces, degradation in Top-K
prediction accuracy increases significantly.
According to Fig. 10, the Top-1 prediction accuracy
with 1 dB margin of narrow-to-narrow predictions are
{0.95, 0.90, 0.75} for Ntx,B = {32, 16, 8}, respectively. In
comparison to corresponding baselines, all AI/ML models
in SBP where Set B is a subset of Set A, significantly
reduce the RSRP difference. Additionally, results emphasize
that the capability of the AI/ML model to predict the correct
beam increases as Ntx,B/Ntx,A approaches 1, confirming that
having more beam measurements is beneficial to yield a better
prediction accuracy.
Fig. 11 shows the gain in the UE throughput ratio in
comparison to its corresponding baseline case. The cell-edge
UEs experience a UE throughput gain of {27%, 13%, 4%}
with narrow-to-narrow predictions for Ntx,B = {8, 16, 32}
compared to corresponding baseline cases. Observations show
that the UE throughput performance increases with narrow-
to-narrow predictions in contrast to the baseline case when
Ntx,B/Ntx,A decreases. A similar trend can be seen for cell-
median UEs. Comparing narrow-to-narrow prediction models,
the UE throughput ratio observed at 95-th percentile of the
CDF does not reflect a performance degradation as Ntx,B
varies.
UE throughput performance at cell-edge is degraded in
narrow-to-narrow predictions when the number of Ntx,B mea-
surements decrease. Similarly, the throughput of cell-edge UEs
reduces as UE predicts a beam with a lower gain compared to
the best beam. On the other hand, UEs in the 95-th percentile
of the CDF do not experience a throughput loss even if the
predicted beam is not the best beam because UE may have
more than one strong beam. Therefore, the modulation and
coding schemes (MCS) used in the data transmission do not
significantly change.
The MOR in SBP where Set B is a subset of Set A, is equal
to 87.5%, 75% and 50% for narrow-to-narrow predictions with
Ntx,B = {8, 16, 32}, respectively. Similarly, corresponding
baseline algorithms achieve the same MOR. According to the
above observations, cell-edge UEs are more susceptible to
throughput degradation as Set B size reduces to obtain a higher
MOR. Additionally, the results emphasize the importance of
0
2
4
6
8
10
eRSRP [dB]
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
CDF
SBP2_8_64
BL_8_64
SBP2_16_64
BL_16_64
SBP2_32_64
BL_32_64
1-dB error margin
Fig. 10. Evaluation of RSRP difference between predicted and genie-aided
best beam’s.
5
50
95
Percentile [%]
50
60
70
80
90
100
User throughput ratio [%]
BL_8_64
SBP2_8_64
BL_16_64
SBP2_16_64
BL_32_64
SBP2_32_64
Fig. 11. Evaluation of 5-th, 50-th and 95-th percentiles in user throughput
ratio with respect to absolute user throughput of [0.54, 1.64, 3.15] × 104
Mbps of narrow-to-narrow beam prediction.
having different AI/ML models on the UE-side or NW-side.
For example, if a UE using narrow-to-narrow prediction with
Ntx,B = 8 starts to experience poor channel conditions, UE
may enable with an AI/ML model applying with Ntx,B = 16
or Ntx,B = 32 to continue the narrow-to-narrow prediction
avoiding the user throughput degradation.
Even though the deployed narrow-to-narrow prediction
AI/ML models exhibit performance enhancement compared
to non-AI/ML baseline schemes, the NW configurations used
for the data collection phase can differ in the inference
phase. Therefore, the following subsection explores the model
generalization aspect of narrow-to-narrow prediction models
as the antenna configuration of the NW changes.
C. Evaluation of Generalization Aspects of SBP
In this subsection, we evaluate the AI/ML model general-
ization aspect of SBP. Evaluation is done with the narrow-to-
narrow prediction with Ntx,B = 16 and Ntx,A = 64 model,
which is trained in a gNB composed of an antenna array
equipped with M V
tx = 4, M H
tx = 8 denoted by 4x8. Then, the
AI/ML model is integrated and tested with two more wireless
networks composed of gNB with antenna array 4x4 and 4x16.
Fig. 12 depicts the variation of RSRP difference of narrow-
to-narrow prediction with different antenna configurations.
Note that the Top-1 prediction accuracy is equal to the ratio at
which eRSRP = 0 and it is observed that Top-1 prediction
0
2
4
6
8
10
eRSRP [dB]
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
CDF
SBP2_16_64 (Antenna:4x4)
SBP2_16_64 (Antenna:4x8)
SBP2_16_64 (Antenna:4x16)
1-dB error margin
Fig. 12. Evaluation of RSRP difference between predicted and genie-aided
best beam’s.
accuracy drops by a minimum 25% if the model is used
in a gNB with different antenna configurations. However,
the narrow-to-narrow prediction with antenna 4x4 achieves
77% of Top-1 prediction accuracy with 1 dB margin and
shows a better generalization ability compared to narrow-to-
narrow prediction with antenna 4x16 which yields a 63%
Top-1 prediction accuracy with 1 dB margin. The observation
concludes that the RSRP difference of more narrow beams
generated by the antenna 4x16 is higher compared to the RSRP
difference of relatively wider beams created by antenna 4x4
if the predicted Top-1 beam differs from the best genie-aided
beam.
The narrower beams generated by a 4x16 antenna array
provide a higher beam gain compared to a 4x8 antenna array.
Similarly, antenna 4x4 reduces the beam gain compared to
antenna 4x8. Thus, Fig. 13 presents the evaluation of the UE
throughput ratio corresponding to the baseline case (denoted
by BL in Fig. 13) with the same antenna array configuration.
BL cases represent the non-AI/ML beam selection approach
where the best beam selected with respect to exhaustive beam
search, i.e. Set B is same as Set A. The gNB equipped
with the 4x16 antenna enhances throughput of cell-edge UEs
by 20.5% compared to gNB with antenna 4x8. Yet, the UE
throughput gain achieved with a larger antenna compared to
4x8 is reduced by 15% due to AI/ML model generalization
impact. The same trend is visible for UEs at the 50-th and 95-
th percentile of UE throughput. Moreover, using a small 4x4
array reduces the overall throughput as shown by the baseline,
and the poor performance is further degraded due to AI/ML
model generalization impacts.
These results suggest that the AI/ML model performs the
best when the specified antenna configuration is the same for
both model training and inference. Otherwise, beam prediction
accuracy and UE throughput degrade due to model general-
ization impacts. Alternatively, the model can be trained with
mixed dataset that include multiple gNB antenna configu-
rations and achieve satisfactory performance [10]. Still, the
problem persist if a new configuration is adopted by gNB.
Note that the UEs in different channel conditions such as cell-
edge, cell-center, etc. may use different models to increase or
5
50
95
Percentile [%]
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
User throughput ratio [%]
BL (Antenna: 4x4)
SBP2_16_64 (Antenna: 4x4)
BL (Antenna: 4x8)
SBP2_16_64 (Antenna: 4x8)
BL (Antenna: 4x16)
SBP2_16_64 (Antenna: 4x16)
Fig. 13. Evaluation of UE throughput ratio with respect to the baseline case
of trained antenna configuration 4x8 which yields a 5-th, 50-th and 95-th
percentiles of absolute UE throughput of [0.49, 1.56, 3.20] × 104 Mbps.
decrease the prediction accuracy as shown in Sec. V-B. Yet,
the NW antenna panel may impact all UEs, and the cell-edge
UE performance degradation is unavoidable, thus these UEs
may only fallback to legacy non-AI/ML BM procedures.
D. Evaluation of TBP
In this subsection, we evaluate the beam prediction accuracy
and UE throughput performance of both alternatives in TBP,
i.e. Set B is equal/subset of Set A. AI/ML models discussed in
this subsection consider refined CSI-RS codebooks with sizes
of 8, 16, and 32 as the Set B. Moreover, the input to each
AI/ML model consists of Set B beam measurements over an
observation window size of 5. All models consider a refined
CSI-RS beam codebook of size 32 as Set A, which is used after
a prediction window size of 1 (denoted by TBP Ntx,B 32).
Additionally, we use a non-AI/ML baseline method; sample
and hold (SnH), which selects the strongest Set B beam at
time t and is used at t and t + 1 as the predicted TX beam.
Fig. 14 depicts the Top-K prediction accuracy evaluation
for TBP models along with the corresponding SnH cases.
It is observed that the model with Ntx,B = 32 degrades
on Top-K prediction accuracy compared to the corresponding
SnH scheme due to the dominant temporal correlation of
the channel. However, models with Set B is a subset of Set
A; Ntx,B = {16, 8} achieve 11% and 30% gain on Top-1
prediction accuracy compared to corresponding SnH schemes,
respectively. Hence, results show that when Ntx,B/Ntx,A
reduces, the Top-K prediction accuracy improves in contrast
to corresponding SnH schemes. However, employing a higher
number of measured beams helps to improve the beam pre-
diction accuracy.
The RSRP difference evaluation of TBP models along with
corresponding SnH schemes are depicted in Fig. 15. The
AI/ML model with Set B codebook size of 32 suffers a loss
of 10.4% with respect to Top-1 prediction accuracy with 1
dB margin loss of 91.5% obtained by the corresponding SnH
scheme. The result also confirms that models with Ntx,B
= {16, 8} perform better compared to corresponding SnH
schemes. Yet, Top-1 prediction accuracy with 1 dB margin for
models with Ntx,B = {16, 8} are 65% and 59%, respectively.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
K
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
CDF
SnH_32_32
TBP_32_32
SnH_16_32
TBP_16_32
SnH_8_32
TBP_8_32
Fig. 14. Evaluation of Top-K prediction accuracy (ATop-K) for varying K.
0
2
4
6
8
10
eRSRP [dB]
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
CDF
SnH_32_32
TBP_32_32
SnH_16_32
TBP_16_32
SnH_8_32
TBP_8_32
1-dB error margin
Fig. 15. Evaluation of RSRP difference between predicted and genie-aided
best beam’s.
Additionally, 20% or more UEs experience more than 3
dB RSRP difference between predicted and genie-aided best
beam’s for both AI/ML models with Ntx,B = {16, 8}.
The observed trends in beam prediction KPIs are further
confirmed by the UE throughput performance shown in Fig.
16. The cell-edge UEs using the AI/ML model with Ntx,B =
32 experience a 7.7% loss of throughput in contrast to the
corresponding SnH scheme. Yet, cell-edge UEs using the
AI/ML model with Ntx,B = 8 experience a 6.4% gain in
throughput compared to corresponding SnH. The throughput
of cell-median UEs who use models with Ntx,B = {16, 32}
show similar performance compared to corresponding baseline
cases. Yet, 50-th percentile UEs in the CDF who use the
AI/ML model with Ntx,B = 16 experience a throughput
improvement of 10% in comparison to similar UEs who
use the corresponding SnH scheme. The AI/ML model with
Ntx,B = 8 performs better at 95-th percentile of UE through-
put compared to 5-th and 50-th, and yet it is less than
90% of UE throughput obtained by SnH scheme with Set B
equals to Set A. Importantly, the evaluated AI/ML models
with Set B codebook sizes 32, 16, and 8 provide a MOR of
16.7%, 58.3%, and 80%, respectively. In a mobile network,
the speeds of the UEs may vary from time to time. Hence,
the following subsection evaluates the model generalization
impact for varying UE speeds.
5
50
95
Percentile [%]
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
User throughput ratio [%]
SnH_32_32
TBP_32_32
SnH_16_32
TBP_16_32
SnH_8_32
TBP_8_32
Fig. 16. Evaluation of UE throughput ratio with respect to SnH 32 32 which
yields an absolute per UE throughput of [0.09, 0.70, 2.49] × 104 Mbps at
5-th, 50-th and 95-th percentiles.
E. Evaluation of Generalization Aspects of TBP
In this subsection, we evaluate the generalization capability
of the TBP AI/ML model with Set B and Set A codebooks
of size 32 trained with a UE speed of 30 kmph and used
in UEs with higher speeds (60 kmph and 120 kmph). Fig.
17 shows the variation of Top-K prediction accuracy with
different UE speeds when K ⩽10. UEs with 60 kmph
speed experience a loss of 3% in Top-1 prediction accuracy
compared to UEs trained at 30 kmph. For an even higher speed
of 120 kmph, the loss in Top-1 prediction accuracy increases
to 6.7%. As the UE speed increases compared to the trained
speed, the input distribution of the L1-RSRP measurements
changes. Moreover, the beam measurements become outdated
within a shorter time duration, since higher speeds introduce
a significant change in UE position.
Fig. 18 depicts 2.9% loss in Top-1 prediction accuracy with
1 dB margin when UE speed is 60 kmph compared to 30
kmph. The degradation becomes even higher for UEs with
120 kmph as 7% in comparison to UEs with a speed of 30
kmph. According to beam prediction accuracy related results,
the model generalization impact of TBP models for higher
speeds is insignificant.
In Fig. 19, throughput at cell-median UEs use AI/ML model
with speeds of 60 and 120 kmph show 6.3% and 10.4%
degradation compared to UEs maintaining the model trained
speed of 30 kmph. However, throughput at cell-median UEs
who used the SnH scheme with higher speeds of 60 and
120 kmph also show a similar degradation as seen with the
AI/ML model performance. Hence, the cell-median UEs who
used the AI/ML model at higher speeds compared to the
trained speed experienced a throughput degradation mainly
due to the more challenging channel conditions in mobility.
The cell-edge UEs experience a very low throughput for higher
speeds compared to cell-median UEs due to mobility and
channel uncertainties. Moreover, the UEs at 95-th percentile of
throughput are resilient to throughput degradation and achieve
more than 95% of throughput with higher speeds compared
to the trained UE speed of 30 kmph. User throughput results
explain the AI/ML model generalization impact is insignificant
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
K
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
CDF
TBP_32_32 (UE speed: 30 kmph)
TBP_32_32 (UE speed: 60 kmph)
TBP_32_32 (UE speed: 120 kmph)
Fig. 17. Evaluation of Top-K prediction accuracy for varying K.
0
2
4
6
8
10
eRSRP [dB]
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
CDF
TBP_32_32 (UE speed: 30 kmph)
TBP_32_32 (UE speed: 60 kmph)
TBP_32_32 (UE speed: 120 kmph)
1-dB error margin
Fig. 18. Evaluation of RSRP difference between predicted and genie-aided
best beam’s.
for the TBP model where Set B is the same as Set B.
F. Design Guidelines for AI/ML-Based BM
In this subsection, we provide some recommendations for
AI/ML model usage based on the evaluation results in the
previous subsections. We assume that an AI/ML model can
be recommended for use in a situation if it can achieve a
minimum of 95% UE throughput compared to the best baseline
case observed. The AI/ML model use guidelines for different
UE scenarios are presented in Table II.
Table II: Recommendations for AI/ML model selection.
AI/ML
model
MOR
(%)
Cell-edge
UEs
Cell-median
UEs
Best
UEs
SBP1 16 64
100
✗
✓
✓
SBP2 8 64
87.5
✗
✓
✓
SBP2 16 64
75
✓
✓
✓
SBP2 32 64
50
✓
✓
✓
TBP 8 32
80
✗
✗
✗
TBP 16 32
58.3
✗
✗
✓
TBP 32 32
16.7
✗
✓
✓
Firstly, the AI/ML models discussed in SBP where Set B
is a subset of Set A decreases the UE throughput of cell-edge
UEs while reducing the measurement overhead. Hence, cell-
edge UEs may required to use narrow-to-narrow prediction
models requiring a larger number of measurements compared
5
50
95
Percentile [%]
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
User throughput ratio [%]
SnH_32_32 (UE speed: 30 kmph)
TBP_32_32 (UE speed: 30 kmph)
SnH_32_32 (UE speed: 60 kmph)
TBP_32_32 (UE speed: 60 kmph)
SnH_32_32 (UE speed: 120 kmph)
TBP_32_32 (UE speed: 120 kmph)
Fig. 19. Evaluation of UE throughput ratio with respect to TBP 32 32 trained
for 30 kmph UE speed, which yields an absolute per UE throughput of
[0.09, 0.69, 2.48] × 104 Mbps at 5-th, 50-th and 95-th percentiles.
 
   
   
   
   
   
    
    
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Antenna
boresight
(a) Distribution of minimum K value such
that Top-K prediction accuracy is 100%.
 
   
   
   
   
   
    
    
 
   
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
Antenna
boresight
(b) Distribution of RSRP error between
predicted beam and Top-1 genie aided
beam’s.
Fig. 20. The spatial distribution of beam prediction accuracy of narrow-to-
narrow prediction with Set B size 8, with a gNB located in x = 0, y = 0.
to other UEs in the cell, which can use narrow-to-narrow pre-
diction models with higher MOR (e.g. MOR = 87.5), as their
throughput difference compared to legacy BM is negligible.
With further experiments using a simpler network deployment,
we observed that the Top-K prediction accuracy does not
show significant differences among UEs in the coverage area
(i.e. the AI/ML model does not discriminate between UEs)
as shown in Fig 20a. However, on the other hand, Fig 20b
depicts that the RSRP difference between predicted and Top-
1 genie-aided beam increases significantly especially for some
elevation/azimuth directions, where the penalized areas could
be at the beam-boundaries or cell-boundaries. Such areas
may likely include cell-edge UEs, where the throughput is
impacted.
At the same time, the wide-to-narrow beam prediction
model, which could avoid CSI-RS beam transmissions in the
P2 procedure, may be applied for all UEs, except for cell-
edge UEs, as they experience some throughput degradation
compared to the narrow-to-narrow prediction model. More-
over, the AI/ML model generalization aspects of SBP show
that the expected gain on UE throughput performance using
a high number of antenna elements is degraded due to the
SBP AI/ML models trained with a lower number of antenna
elements. Thus, UE throughput gains provided by enabling
the transmission with a larger antenna size may be limited
by generalization. This is because the SBP models need to
be used for the configurations in which the AI/ML model is
trained or in case of a configuration change, the AI/ML model
needs to be fine-tuned to support the new configuration. In all
of the cases, performance monitoring procedure may allow the
UEs to fallback to legacy non-ML BM procedures in case of
severe performance degradation of the model.
Conversely, the TBP studies of narrow-to-narrow beam
prediction AI/ML models show marginal performance gains
compared to the sample and hold baseline. Thus, a second-
round of beam measurements based on AI/ML model pre-
diction may be used to improve the performance. Generally,
the AI/ML model with Set B and Set A size of 32 can be
used for UEs with strong channel conditions and cell-median
UEs even though the advantages of measurements overhead
are less compared to SBP models. The AI/ML model with
Set B size of 16 and Set A size of 32 can be used for UEs
with strong channel conditions, and the model with Set B
size of 8 and Set A size of 32 is not suitable for any UE
due to its low performance. Finally, according to the given
results, the degradation in generalization due to UE speed is
less compared to the changes in the NW antenna configuration
which applies also to TBP. Overall, the poor performance with
AI/ML models at cell-edge because of wrong beam prediction
highlights the need for improving the AI/ML model training.
For instance, by penalizing the prediction errors of cell-edge
UEs compared to other UEs, which could be realized by
adopting more sophisticated loss functions or using different
sampling of training data.
An additional important aspect is the computational com-
plexity of AI/ML model. All SBP AI/ML models consist of
50 × 103 to 150 × 103 hyper-parameters where the AI/ML
model size is less than 1 MB. Additionally, the computational
complexity of models is less than 1.2 × 106 floating point op-
erations per second (FLOPS). TBP AI/ML models composed
of 100×103 to 200×103 hyper-parameters which also require
less than 1 MB of memory to store the model and less than
2 × 106 FLOPS. Hence, the AI/ML models evaluated in this
study have moderate computational complexity and limited
memory occupation. The computational complexity can be
further reduced considering the designs as in [34], which
provides a promising direction to make the AI/ML models
studied in this work to be easily transferred, deployed and
stored at the UE.
In summary, according to Table II, most of the AI/ML
models failed to deliver more than 90% throughput for cell-
edge UEs compared to baseline cases. Improvement of cell-
edge UE performance using assisted information such as
UE positions, AoA and AoD can be considered as a future
research direction. Moreover, we assumed ideal L1-RSRP
measurements and reporting from a UE, inaccurate L1-RSRP
measurements may degrade the beam prediction accuracy as
well as system-level performance. Also, we assumed UE report
all Set B beams and corresponding RSRP measurements to
gNB. However, the UE may consider reporting partial beam
measurements (NS ⩽Ntx,B) and adopt adaptive quantization
to limit the reporting overhead. Finally, the AI/ML model
activation and deactivation based on performance monitoring
and coexistence between AI/ML-based BM and legacy BM
are other interesting research directions.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented an in-depth analysis of SBP
and TBP AI/ML models and their generalization abilities
to investigate the link between ML model performance and
system-level performance. The analysis covered sub-use cases
of SBP, Set B is different from Set A and Set B is a subset of
Set A, and sub-use cases of TBP where Set A equals Set B and
Set B is a subset of Set A as discussed in 3GPP Rel-18 SI. We
derived AI/ML BM design guidelines based on the throughput
performances, which showed the necessity of using AI/ML
models with higher Set B size for cell-edge UEs. Moreover,
the AI/ML model generalization issues studied in this paper
suggested that the future research directions may address UE-
sided AI/ML model generalization capabilities to different
conditions (e.g, NW antenna configurations, beam patterns,
etc.), reinforcement learning (RL) could be a direction as
it may update the model depending on the new-conditions.
Moreover, the beam prediction framework studied and cur-
rently under consideration for specification in 3GPP Rel-19 WI
is intended to be generic therefore RL and other model training
enhancements may be supported as well. Model complexity is
also another important aspect and can be reduced to improve
inference latency. As beamforming aspects are not impacting
only FR2 but also FR1, we envision the usage of beam
prediction approaches in different bands. In addition, multiple
TX/RX point (multi-TRP) scheme and efficient handover in
mobility scenarios can be other venues where to apply beam
prediction. Lastly, in future systems prediction reports and
measurement reports may be used for power control, link
adaptation, among other procedures, which could be designed
to use or discard predicted beams measurements depending on
AI/ML model accuracy.
VII. APPENDIX
Table III provides the set of simulation parameters used to
configure the system-level simulator.
REFERENCES
[1] Nokia, “5G-Advanced: Expanding 5G for the connected world,” Nokia,
White paper CID210984, February 2023.
[2] Nokia, “Taking 5G-Advanced to the next level and bridging into the 6G
era,” Nokia, White paper CID213705, January 2024.
[3] M. Chen, U. Challita, W. Saad, C. Yin, and M. Debbah, “Artificial
Neural Networks-Based Machine Learning for Wireless Networks: A
Tutorial,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 4,
pp. 3039–3071, 2019.
[4] J. Pihlajasalo, D. Korpi, M. Honkala, J. M. J. Huttunen, T. Riihonen,
J. Talvitie, A. Brihuega, M. A. Uusitalo, and M. Valkama, “Hybrid-
DeepRx: Deep Learning Receiver for High-EVM Signals,” in 2021 IEEE
32nd Annual International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile
Radio Communications (PIMRC), 2021, pp. 622–627.
[5] A. Kelkar and C. Dick, “NVIDIA Aerial GPU Hosted AI-on-5G,” in
2021 IEEE 4th 5G World Forum (5GWF), 2021, pp. 64–69.
[6] J. Pihlajasalo, D. Korpi, M. Honkala, J. M. J. Huttunen, T. Riihonen,
J. Talvitie, A. Brihuega, M. A. Uusitalo, and M. Valkama, “Deep Learn-
ing OFDM Receivers for Improved Power Efficiency and Coverage,”
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 22, no. 8, pp.
5518–5535, 2023.
Table III: 3GPP-based SLS parameters
Parameter
Value
Frequency range
FR2 with a carrier frequency of 30 GHz
Network deployment
500 m inter-site distance (ISD), gNB
antenna height: 25 m, 7 sites with 3
sectors/gNB per site with wrap-around
Channel mode
Urban
macro
(UMa)
scenario
with
distance-dependent LoS probability
System bandwidth
80 MHz, subcarrier spacings: 120 kHz
UE distribution
10 UEs per sector/gNB, UE antenna
height: 1.5 m, 100% outdoor UEs
gNB antenna configu-
ration
One panel with (M, N, P, Mg, Ng):
(4, 8, 2, 1, 1), (dV , dH) = (0.5, 0.5)λ
gNB beam selection
based on maximum L1-RSRP
gNB antenna radia-
tion pattern
TR 38.802 Table A.2.1-6, Table A.2.1-7
[32]
Maximum TX power
40 dBm for gNB, 23 dBm for UE
UE antenna configu-
ration
Panel structure: (M, N, P) = (1, 4, 2), 2
UE panels (left, right) with (Mg, Ng) =
(1, 2)
UE panel selection
Ideal
Number of UE beams
8 (4 beams per UE panel)
UE beam selection
Optimal RX beam selection based on
maximum
L1-RSRP
calculated
with
sliding window size 3
UE antenna radiation
pattern
TR 38.802 Table A.2.1-8, Table A.2.1-
10 [32]
Link adaptation
Based on CSI-RS
Control and RS over-
head
common overhead is 30% based on TR
37.910 for DenseUrban-eMBB scenario
[35]
Traffic model
Full buffer
Control channel de-
coding
Ideal
UE receiver type
MMSE-IRC
Beamforming scheme
Analog Beamforming
gNB selection
Based on the RSRP
RX noise figure
7 dB for gNB, 10 dB for UE
[7] J. Hoydis, F. A. Aoudia, A. Valcarce, and H. Viswanathan, “Toward a
6G AI-Native Air Interface,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 59,
no. 5, pp. 76–81, 2021.
[8] M. Merluzzi et al., “The Hexa-X Project Vision on Artificial Intelligence
and Machine Learning-Driven Communication and Computation Co-
Design for 6G,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 65 620–65 648, 2023.
[9] M. K. Shehzad, L. Rose, M. M. Butt, I. Z. Kov´acs, M. Assaad, and
M. Guizani, “Artificial Intelligence for 6G Networks: Technology Ad-
vancement and Standardization,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine,
vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 16–25, 2022.
[10] 3GPP, “Study on Artificial Intelligence (AI)/Machine Learning (ML) for
NR air interface,” 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), Technical
Report (TR) 38.843, 12 2023.
[11] M. Enescu, K. Jayasinghe, K. Ranta-Aho, K. Schober, and A. Toskala,
5G Physical Layer.
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2020, ch. 6, pp. 87–148.
[12] Y. Wang, A. Klautau, M. Ribero, A. C. K. Soong, and R. W. Heath,
“MmWave Vehicular Beam Selection With Situational Awareness Using
Machine Learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 87 479–87 493, 2019.
[13] P. Susarla, B. Gouda, Y. Deng, M. Juntti, O. Silv´en, and A. T¨olli,
“Learning-Based Beam Alignment for Uplink mmWave UAVs,” IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1779–
1793, 2023.
[14] H.-L. Song and Y.-C. Ko, “Beam Alignment for High-Speed UAV via
Angle Prediction and Adaptive Beam Coverage,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, vol. 70, no. 10, pp. 10 185–10 192, 2021.
[15] Y. N. R. Li, B. Gao, X. Zhang, and K. Huang, “Beam Management in
Millimeter-Wave Communications for 5G and beyond,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 13 282–13 293, 2020.
[16] X. Lin, “An Overview of the 3GPP Study on Artificial Intelligence for
5G New Radio,” 2023.
[17] Q. Xue, J. Guo, B. Zhou, Y. Xu, Z. Li, and S. Ma, “AI/ML for Beam
Management in 5G-Advanced,” 2023.
[18] J. Xu, I. Nakamura, R. Feng, L. Liu, and L. Chen, “Performance
Evaluation of AI/ML Model to Enhance Beam Management in 5G-
Advanced System,” in 2023 Fourteenth International Conference on
Mobile Computing and Ubiquitous Network (ICMU), 2023, pp. 1–6.
[19] J. Zuo, J. Zhang, Y. Cao, X. Chen, F. Wang, N. Hu, and X. Xu, “Artificial
Intelligence-Based Spatial Domain Beam Prediction for 5G Beyond,” in
2022 IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), 2022, pp. 1460–1465.
[20] Q. Li et al., “Machine Learning Based Time Domain Millimeter-
Wave Beam Prediction for 5G-Advanced and Beyond: Design, Analysis,
and Over-The-Air Experiments,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 1787–1809, 2023.
[21] Y. Bai, J. Zhang, C. Sun, L. Zhao, H. Li, and X. Wang, “AI-Based
Beam Management in 3GPP: Optimizing Data Collection Time Win-
dow for Temporal Beam Prediction,” IEEE Open Journal of Vehicular
Technology, vol. 5, pp. 48–55, 2024.
[22] S. Wang, W. Chen, X. Chen, Y. Zhang, and B. Ai, “Deep Learning-Based
Beam Pair Prediction With Finite Beam Quality Information,” in 2023
IEEE 23rd International Conference on Communication Technology
(ICCT), 2023, pp. 588–592.
[23] L. Maggi, A. R. Koblitz, Q. Zhu, and M. Andrews, “Tracking the Best
Beam for a Mobile User via Bayesian Optimization,” in 2023 IEEE 97th
Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC2023-Spring), 2023, pp. 1–7.
[24] C. Sun, L. Zhao, T. Cui, H. Li, Y. Bai, S. Wu, and Q. Tong, “AI Model
Selection and Monitoring for Beam Management in 5G-Advanced,”
IEEE Open Journal of the Communications Society, vol. 5, pp. 38–50,
2024.
[25] S. Khunteta and A. K. R. Chavva, “Recurrent Neural Network Based
Beam Prediction for Millimeter-Wave 5G Systems,” in 2021 IEEE
Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), 2021,
pp. 1–6.
[26] D. Marasinghe, N. Jayaweera, N. Rajatheva, S. Hakola, T. Koskela,
O. Tervo, J. Karjalainen, E. Tiirola, and J. Hulkkonen, “LiDAR aided
Wireless Networks - Beam Prediction for 5G,” in 2022 IEEE 96th
Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC2022-Fall), 2022, pp. 1–7.
[27] A. Bonfante, L. G. Giordano, I. Macaluso, and N. Marchetti, “Perfor-
mance of Predictive Indoor mmWave Networks With Dynamic Block-
ers,” IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking,
vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 812–827, 2022.
[28] V. V. Ratnam and A. F. Molisch, “Periodic Analog Channel Estimation
Aided Beamforming for Massive MIMO Systems,” IEEE Transactions
on Wireless Communications, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 1581–1594, 2019.
[29] J. Suh, C. Kim, W. Sung, J. So, and S. W. Heo, “Construction of a
Generalized DFT Codebook Using Channel-Adaptive Parameters,” IEEE
Communications Letters, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 196–199, 2017.
[30] A. Kammoun, H. Khanfir, Z. Altman, M. Debbah, and M. Kamoun,
“Preliminary Results on 3D Channel Modeling: From Theory to Stan-
dardization,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 1219–1229, 2014.
[31] S. Noh, M. D. Zoltowski, and D. J. Love, “Multi-Resolution Codebook
and Adaptive Beamforming Sequence Design for Millimeter Wave Beam
Alignment,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 16,
no. 9, pp. 5689–5701, 2017.
[32] 3GPP, “Study on New Radio Access Technology Physical Layer As-
pects,” 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), Technical Report
(TR) 38.802, 09 2017.
[33] F. Abinader, C. Rom, K. Pedersen, S. Hailu, and N. Kolehmainen,
“System-Level Analysis of mmWave 5G Systems with Different Multi-
Panel Antenna Device Models,” in 2021 IEEE 93rd Vehicular Technol-
ogy Conference (VTC2021-Spring), 2021, pp. 1–6.
[34] M. Q. Khan, A. Gaber, M. Parvini, P. Schulz, and G. Fettweis, “A Low-
Complexity Machine Learning Design for mmWave Beam Prediction,”
2024.
[35] 3GPP, “5G; Study on self evaluation towards IMT-2020 submission,” 3rd
Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), Technical Report (TR) 37.910,
11 2020.
