arXiv:2308.02135v1  [cs.IT]  4 Aug 2023
1
A Survey of Beam Management for mmWave and
THz Communications Towards 6G
Qing Xue, Member, IEEE, Chengwang Ji, Shaodan Ma, Senior Member, IEEE, Jiajia Guo, Member, IEEE,
Yongjun Xu, Senior Member, IEEE, Qianbin Chen, Senior Member, IEEE, and Wei Zhang, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Communication in millimeter wave (mmWave) and
even terahertz (THz) frequency bands is ushering in a new era
of wireless communications. Beam management, namely initial
access and beam tracking, has been recognized as an essential
technique to ensure robust mmWave/THz communications, es-
pecially for mobile scenarios. However, narrow beams at higher
carrier frequency lead to huge beam measurement overhead,
which has a negative impact on beam acquisition and tracking. In
addition, the beam management process is further complicated by
the ﬂuctuation of mmWave/THz channels, the random movement
patterns of users, and the dynamic changes in the environment.
For mmWave and THz communications toward 6G, we have wit-
nessed a substantial increase in research and industrial attention
on artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), reconﬁgurable intelligent surface
(RIS), and integrated sensing and communications (ISAC). The
introduction of these enabling technologies presents both open
opportunities and unique challenges for beam management. In
this paper, we present a comprehensive survey on mmWave
and THz beam management. Further, we give some insights
on technical challenges and future research directions in this
promising area.
Index
Terms—beam
management
(beam
align-
ment/training/tracking),
artiﬁcial
intelligence,
reconﬁgurable
intelligent surface, integrated sensing and communication.
I. INTRODUCTION
In order to meet the expected growth of wireless data
trafﬁc, millimeter wave (mmWave) technology, operating in
about 30-100 GHz Radio Frequency (RF) band, has become
one of the promising candidates for indoor and outdoor
wireless communications. This is evident from the emergence
of standards, which mainly include IEEE 802.11ad [1] and its
evolution IEEE 802.11ay [2] for wireless local area networks
(WLANs), IEEE 802.15.3c [3] for wireless personal area
networks (WPANs), and a series of Releases standardized
by the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) for the
5th generation (5G) New Radio (NR) access networks. Since
3GPP completed the ﬁrst release of 5G NR in its Release
15 [4], the 5G evolution has progressed swiftly in Releases
16 and 17 [5], [6]. Now 3GPP is entering the second stage
Qing
Xue,
Yongjun
Xu,
and Qianbin
Chen
are
with
the
School
of Communication and Information Engineering, Chongqing University
of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing 400065, China (e-mails:
xueq@cqupt.edu.cn; xuyj@cqupt.edu.cn; chenqb@cqupt.edu.cn).
Chengwang Ji, Shaodan Ma and Jiajia Guo are with the State Key Labora-
tory of Internet of Things for Smart City, University of Macau, Macao SAR,
China (e-mails: yc27411@connect.um.edu.mo; shaodanma@um.edu.mo; jia-
jiaguo@seu.edu.cn).
Wei Zhang is with the School of Electrical Engineering and Telecommu-
nications, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia
(e-mail: w.zhang@unsw.edu.au).
of the 5G NR standardization, which is also known as 5G-
Advanced and will be speciﬁed in Release 18 [7]. Although
mmWave communications can greatly improve network speed
and capacity, it may still not meet the future growth demand of
wireless data trafﬁc. It is because that, each year, various new
devices in different form factors with increased capabilities
and intelligence are introduced and adopted in the market. In
order to meet the growing demand of the wireless communica-
tion industry and support Tbps-level data rates, the exploration
and research on the RF spectrum with higher speed and
greater bandwidth has been stimulated. Among the available
frequency bands, the Terahertz (THz) band, which nominally
occupies the spectrum of 0.1-10 THz, has attracted extensive
attention. The ﬁrst standard for wireless communications over
the THz band, IEEE 802.15.3d [8], was ofﬁcially approved
in Fall 2017, where the deﬁned switched point-to-point links
operate at the sub-THz frequency around 300 GHz and enable
data rates of up to 100 Gbit/s. The THz communications
are envisioned as a key technology to fulﬁll future demands
for beyond 5G such as the 6th generation (6G) wireless
systems. In order to provide seamless high-quality services,
beam management, which collectively encompasses initial
beam training/alignment, monitoring and tracking, as well as
recovery from beam failures, is crucial for 6G mmWave and
THz communications.
A. Review: 6G Vision
In response to the tremendous emergence of smart devices
and the rapid expansion of Internet of Things (IoT) networks,
5G has made tradeoffs in terms of throughput, latency, energy
efﬁciency, deployment cost, hardware complexity, and end-to-
end reliability. Facing 2030 and beyond, 6G will be developed
to jointly fulﬁll strict network requirements in a holistic
fashion. 6G are envisioned to provide autonomous, ultra-large-
scale, extremely dynamic, and fully intelligent services with
high quality of experience (QoE). By now, there are a number
of surveys on 6G networks, e.g., [9]–[13]. We here brieﬂy
review the core requirements and enabling technologies of 6G.
For 5G, the usage scenarios recommended by International
Telecommunication Union (ITU)-Radiocommunication Sector
(ITU-R) can be classiﬁed as enhanced mobile broadband
(eMBB), ultra-reliable low-latency communications (URLLC),
and massive machine-type communications (mMTC) [14].
With the advent of new technologies and the continuous
evolution of existing technologies, many unprecedented ap-
plications can be cultivated in 6G era. The potential usage
2
scenarios in 6G communication systems are expected to be
featured by ubiquitous mobile ultra-broadband, extremely reli-
able and low-latency communications, ultra-mMTC, ultra-high
data density, and extremely low-power communications. The
key performance indicators (KPIs) for evaluating 6G wireless
networks include:
◦Peak data rate: ≥1푇푏푖푡/푠
◦User experienced data rate: 10 ∼100퐺푏푖푡/푠
◦Over-the-air latency: 0.01 ∼0.1푚푠
◦Mobility: ≥1000푘푚/ℎ
◦Reliability: 99.99999%
◦Connection density: 108 ∼109푑푒푣푖푐푒푠/푘푚3
◦Network energy efﬁciency: 10 ∼100 times that of 5G
◦Area trafﬁc capacity: 0.1 ∼10퐺푏푖푡/푠/푚3
◦Spectrum efﬁciency: at least 2 ∼3 times that of 5G
◦Positioning accuracy: 10푐푚indoor and 1푚outdoor
To well achieve these KPIs, 6G is expected to integrate
several new capabilities currently not covered by wireless
communication systems, such as
• Ubiquitous three-dimensional (3D) connectivity: Integrating
terrestrial, airborne (e.g., unmanned aerial vehicles, UAVs),
and satellite networks into a single wireless system will be
essential for 6G [15]. The network coverage will be globally
ubiquitous and will be shifted from two-dimensional in
traditional terrestrial networks to 3D in a space-air-ground
integrated network.
• Collective network intelligence: As mobile networks are
increasingly sophisticated and heterogeneous, many opti-
mization tasks become intractable, which offers an oppor-
tunity for artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) [16], more speciﬁcally
machine learning (ML) techniques. Additionally, 6G will
bring intelligence from centralized computing facilities to
end terminals to provide distributed autonomy, while im-
proving security, secrecy, and privacy.
• Integration of sensing and communication: The function
of mobile network is evolving from communication only
towards integrated sensing and communications (ISAC)
(a.k.a joint communication and radar/radio sensing, JCAS)
[17]. 6G networks will exploit a uniﬁed interface for
sensing/localization and communications to improve control
operations relying on context information.
• Communication with large intelligent surfaces: Reconﬁg-
urable intelligent surface (RIS) [18], also known under
the names intelligent reﬂecting surface (IRS) and software-
controlled metasurface, has positive signiﬁcance in solv-
ing the pain points of small cells such as non-line-of-
sight (NLoS) transmissions and reducing coverage holes.
Large-scale RIS is envisaged as the massive multiple-input
multiple-output (MIMO) technology 2.0 in 6G.
• Other new paradigms empowered by blockchain, digital
twin, quantum computing and communications, etc.
6G wireless network is promising to signiﬁcantly improve
QoE and support a sustainable future. The unprecedented new
technological trends will shape its performance goals.
B. Motivation
For 6G mmWave and THz communication systems, ultra-
large-scale antenna arrays may be equipped at both base
station (BS) and user equipment (UE) sides, such that high
path loss can be compensated by generating narrow beams
with strong beamforming gains. This leads to the fact that
mmWave and THz communications rely heavily on beam
management (beam training/alignment/tracking) to select the
appropriate beam(s) during intra/inter-cell mobility in a quick
manner to avoid any beam misalignment (transmit-receive
beams do not point to each other) or beam/link failure.
However, beam management is challenging because of the
unfavorable propagation characteristics of mmWave/THz sig-
nals. Traditional schemes such as exhaustive search suffer
from severe overhead, increased communication delay, and
degraded spectral efﬁciency. To address these issues, various
beam management mechanisms have been proposed to reduce
beam training overhead or to enhance beam alignment ac-
curacy [19]–[23]. The typical mechanisms for conventional
mmWave networks have been investigated by several survey
papers, which will be introduced in detail later. But after these
surveys were published, a number of new beam management
solutions based on 6G technology enablers have sprung up like
mushrooms. In addition, the survey on THz beam management
is now extremely lacking. Motivated by these facts, we conduct
in-depth research on the latest 6G beam management schemes.
For mmWave and THz communications toward 6G, the most
powerful tools are the AI, RIS, and ISAC. In this regard, four
key trends are as follows.
• Empowered by AI. AI-empowered beam management can
quickly adjust beam parameters to continuously provide
considerable QoE and maintain network health by monitor-
ing real-time network dynamics. In addition to the popular
deep learning (DL), a few cutting-edge AI techniques rep-
resented by federated learning (FL) and transfer learning
(TL) are beginning to show strong potential in 6G beam
management because they pose a chance to distributed
collaborative learning tasks and improve training speed.
• Enabled by Sensing. In 6G, sensing function will be tightly
integrated with communications to support autonomous sys-
tems, which motivates the recent research theme of ISAC.
The sensing function can be used to track UE for beam
prediction/tracking in mmWave/THz communications. We
expect that ISAC will become more popular in beam man-
agement in the near future, especially in practical dynamic
environments where wireless channels vary fast.
• Enhanced by RIS. Among all potential candidates to alleviate
blockage (channel drop caused by obstacles, device move-
ment, or rotation) and expand coverage of mmWave/THz
communications, RIS is widely considered promising for
6G as it offers a cost-effective solution. In addition to the
beneﬁts, the deployment of RIS complicates the system
architecture and poses a signiﬁcant challenge for beam
management which coordinates BS-RIS to jointly manage
two-hop transmission.
• Driven by Combination. In some scenarios, AI, RIS and
sensing functions may be coupled with each other, bringing
new opportunities and challenges to beam management.
As new technologies constantly emerge to improve the fu-
ture generation communication networks, some existing tech-
niques in beam management may become under-performing
3
which directly challenges the overall network performance.
The research interest in beam management will be renewed
to seek improved or novel solutions combined with emerging
technologies. This area is concerned by several interesting
research work to date but remains a very hot topic. In this
context, we survey the state-of-the-art by pursuing the above
four avenues.
C. Our Survey Scope and Contributions
This paper conducts a comprehensive and dedicated survey
on the emerging research achievements related to tackling
a set of beam management problems in 6G mmWave and
THz networks and applications, and discusses the unsolved
challenges and open research avenues. The key contributions
are highlighted as follows.
1) The advancements of beam management for both
mmWave and THz communication systems integrating
AI, sensing, and RIS are surveyed. Most existing survey
papers on beam management focus only on mmWave
communications and rarely involve THz communications.
Some AI-driven technologies are summarized in them,
while the research on emerging technologies towards
ISAC and RIS-assisted systems is insufﬁcient. To the
best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to present a
comprehensive review of the latest research in the area
of improving beam management performance for both
mmWave and THz communications and highlight the new
trends of deploying AI, ISAC and RIS approaches.
2) Beyond single-agent settings, we overview the collabo-
rative beam management approaches across multi-agent
or multiple learning processes. AI technique that can
recognize and learn complex environmental dynamics
has been identiﬁed as a beam management remedy.
Several papers have summarized the existing AI-based
beam management schemes, typically targeting single-
agent scenarios. On this basis, this survey paper not only
further investigates some new efforts for single agent,
but also deeply analyzes the beam management schemes
for multi-agent multi-task collaboration scenarios relying
on FL, TL, and split learning. For increasingly com-
plex wireless communication environments, collaborative
learning is a rare way to solve the problem of high-
precision and low delay beam management, which is
worth exploring.
3) Crucially, the predictive beam management solutions
for ISAC systems in the literature are reviewed for the
ﬁrst time. Alignment and tracking of beams, especially
pencil-sharp beams, has been a challenging issue for
mmWave/THz communication in high-mobility scenar-
ios. Compared with the traditional schemes based on
the communication-only protocols, ISAC (sensing)-based
predictive beam management has shown substantial po-
tentials to meet the critical latency requirements. Various
lines of research work have been conducted in the litera-
ture. We are committed to in-depth research and analysis
of current ISAC-based beam management efforts. There
is no existing work on this topic.
4) This is the ﬁrst survey on beam management in RIS-
assisted mmWave and THz communication systems. RIS,
another key 6G enabler, can alleviate signal/channel
blockage in mmWave/THz communication networks by
intelligently reconﬁguring propagation environment. As
a new paradigm, RIS-assisted system brings new oppor-
tunities to solve the blockage problem, but also faces
new and unique challenges from the standpoint of beam
management. This survey reviews state-of-the-art beam
management solutions for RIS-assisted mmWave/THz
systems, and discusses their respective advantages and
limitations. In particular, the applicability of AI-driven
and sensing-aided algorithms is explored, and exciting
new prospects unfolding in this ﬁeld are identiﬁed. Very
few surveys have touched on this point.
5) This is a review of over 150 papers in the ﬁeld. Lessons
learned, remaining open challenges and future directions
of beam management are identiﬁed. We give readers an
overview of what has been done and what are the general
future research directions in applying AI, RIS and ISAC
(sensing) to improve beam management performance.
We ﬁrmly believe that this technological survey will be
beneﬁcial to both beginners and experts in the ﬁeld of 6G
beam management, and undoubtedly will guide readers to
put forward new ideas in this developing research area.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
provides an overview of the beam management procedures
in 3GPP NR and IEEE standards and summarizes the related
survey papers. Section III carries out an extensive literature re-
view on the state-of-the-art 6G beam management approaches
based on emerging technologies, including AI, RIS, and ISAC.
The possible avenues for future work are discussed in Section
IV. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section V. An overview
of the outline of this survey paper is illustrated in Fig. 1.
II. OVERVIEW ON CONVENTIONAL BEAM MANAGEMENT
Beam management aims to acquire and maintain a set
of transmitter and/or receiver beams which can be used
for downlink and/or uplink transmission/reception. To better
understand the terminology, descriptions of the key terms in
beam management are given in Table I. In this section, we
ﬁrst provide the overview on beam management procedure for
3GPP NR cellular networks and further present some expected
enhancements considered for the future NR standard. We then
elaborate on the beam training and tracking scheme designed
for WLANs and WPANs in IEEE 802.11ad, 802.11ay, and
802.15.3c. After that, we make a comparative analysis of the
existing survey papers on beam management.
A. Beam Management in 3GPP NR
In 3GPP NR, beam management is deﬁned as a set of basic
beam-related procedures in the physical (PHY)/medium access
control (MAC) layer, as shown in Fig. 2, including at least the
following four operations [24].
✓Beam sweeping: an operation of covering a spatial area,
with beams transmitted and/or received during a time
interval in a predetermined way.
4
TABLE I
KEY TERMS AND DESCRIPTIONS IN BEAM MANAGEMENT.
Term
Description
Beam
The main lobe of the radiation pattern of an antenna array.
Beam pair
A pair of beams (transmit and receive patterns) for transmission and corresponding reception.
Beam management (3GPP)
A set of beam-related procedures for ﬁne alignment of the transmitter and receiver beams.
Beamforming
A signal processing technique used in antenna arrays for directional signal transmission or reception.
Beam alignment
The operations of searching for candidate beam directions at the transmitter and/or receiver to ﬁnd the optimal beam pair.
Beam training
A set of operations to estimate the beam steering directions for beam alignment.
Beam tracking
The priori-aided beam training to track beams (or channels) in mobile environment.
Beam steering
A technique for changing the direction of the main lobe of a beam (radiation pattern).
I-A. Review: 6G Vision
I-B. 6G Beam Management
I-C. Survey Scope and Contributions
Section I. Introduction
II-A. Beam Management in 3GPP NR
II-B. Beam Management in IEEE
BFT in IEEE 802.11ad
BFT in IEEE 802.11ay
BFT in IEEE 802.15.3c
II-C. Related Survey Papers
Section II. Overview on Conventional Beam Management 
III-A. Technology Enablers
Why AI?
Why ISAC?
Why RIS?
III-B. AI-Empowered Beam Management
Independent Training
Collaborative Training
III-C. Beam Management for ISAC Systems
Radar Sensing
Communication Signal Sensing
C&S Hybrid Signal Sensing
Hiring Dedicated Sensors
III-D. Beam Management for RIS-Enhanced Systems
Beam Sweeping-based Methods
AI-driven Methods
Sensing-aided Methods
III-E. Lessons Learned: Summary and Insights
Section III. Enabling-technology-based 6G Beam Management: State-of-the-Art
IV-A. AI-Empowered 6G Framework
Collaborative Edge AI
Sensing AI
                            Model Generalization
Life Cycle Management
IV-B. ISAC-Enabled 6G Framework
Radar-Type ISAC Implementation
DMG Sensing
Collaborative Sensing
Supported by RIS
IV-C. RIS-Enhanced 6G Framework
Support for Mobility
Multi-Cell Multi-RIS
Multi-User and MIMO
Bring in Active Ability
              IV-D. THz Beam Management Towards 6G
Section IV. Challenges and Open Issues
Section V. Conclusion
Fig. 1. The outline of this survey paper.
✓Beam
measurement:
an
operation
for
transmission-
reception points (TRPs) or UE to measure characteristics
of received and/or transmitted beamformed signals.
✓Beam reporting: an operation for UE to report information
of beamformed signal(s) based on beam measurement.
✓Beam determination: an operation for TRP(s) or UE to
select at least one of its own transmit/receive beam(s).
The measurement process is carried out with an exhaus-
tive search, also known as beam sweeping, at pre-speciﬁed
Beam link failure
Beam tracking
UE mobility
TRP
UE
TRP
UE
UE
TRP
 Procedure 1 (P1) :  Beam Selection
Procedure 2 (P2) :
 Beam Refinement for the TRP
Procedure 3 (P3) :
 Beam Refinement for the UE 
Beam Sweeping
Beam 
Measurement
Beam 
Reporting
Beam 
Determination
Beam  
Maintenance
 Beam Failure Recovery
Transmission Beam(s)
Candidate Beam Pool
Beam link failure request
Fig. 2. 3GPP beam management procedure.
intervals and directions. During beam sweeping, the TRP/UE
measures the received power of beamformed reference signals
(RSs) to derive the beam quality, which is typically expressed
in terms of reference signal received power (RSRP). Mea-
surement of the signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR)
of RSs is also supported in Release 16 of 5G [25]. The
measurement results (beam quality and beam decision infor-
mation) of the UE will be send to the BS. Based on the
measurement, the TRP/UE selects the optimal beam (or set of
beams) to set up a directional communication link. These beam
management operations are periodically repeated to update the
optimal beam pair(s) over time. Further details of the beam
management procedure in 5G NR can be found, for example,
in [26]. During communication, the environment may change,
which may lead to beam failure. Beam failure event (link
blockage or beam misalignment) occurs when the quality of
beam-pair link(s) of an associated control channel falls low
enough (e.g., comparison with a threshold, time-out of an
associated timer). In general, beam misalignment between the
transmitter and receiver is most likely to occur with narrow
beamwidth, especially in a high mobile network. 3GPP NR
supports that UE can trigger mechanism to recover from beam
failure. This procedure is known as beam recovery which
can be broken down into four steps: beam failure detection,
candidate beam identiﬁcation, recovery request transmission,
and monitoring response for recovery request. To accomplish
5
this, the NR UE continuously monitors whether any beam
failure condition is triggered. Once beam failure is detected,
the UE proceeds to identify the candidate beam(s) that can
restore the connectivity. When one or more candidate beams
are found, the UE transmits a beam failure recovery request
carrying an identiﬁer of the new beam to the TRP. After that,
the UE monitors the corresponding control channel to receive
a response to the recovery request, which is sent by the TRP
with the new beam identiﬁed by the UE. If the response is
successfully received, the beam recovery procedure is success-
ful and a new beam pair link is established for subsequent
communication. Otherwise, the UE may perform additional
beam recovery requests. If it still fails, the UE initiates this
beam recovery procedure, which possibly includes cell re-
selection.
For an idle UE, who accesses the network for the ﬁrst time,
beam management is the basis of designing a directional initial
access strategy. After the initial access, beam management is
required to maintain the link by updating the steering direction
and the shape of beam as the channel changes dynamically
when the UE moves. This procedure is generally known
as beam tracking. Thereby, the beam management can be
categorized as initial beam establishment and beam tracking
(beam maintenance). At present, 3GPP continues to evolve
5G NR. The beam management related procedures that can
be further studied in the current 3GPP technical speciﬁcations
are presented as follows.
1) The requirements for beam determination procedure
related to select at least one of its own transmit/receive
beam(s) need to be further studied by the 3GPP technical
speciﬁcation group (TSG) radio access network (RAN) work
group (WG) 4, which is commonly abbreviated to RAN4 [27].
Meanwhile, the detailed beam measurement requirements, e.g.,
beam measurement period and accuracy, need to be further
studied since the physical layer design has not been ﬁnalized.
The potential beam reporting requirements including at least
reporting delay also need to be studied by RAN4. Moreover,
whether the requirements of radio resource management for
beam sweeping at both NR UE and TRP sides are needed
needs further study.
2) Larger antenna arrays are expected to support certain link
budgets in high frequencies. Methods for managing narrower
beams and a larger number of beams should be studied
[28]. Meanwhile, enhancement on discovery and tracking to
support various beam assumptions should be investigated, as
the number of supported beams and the beam codebook space
may vary depending on the form factor and device.
3) Beam management is one of the use cases for applying
AI/ML to NR air interface [29]. In this case, beam man-
agement can be carried out in terms of beam prediction in
time and/or spatial domain for overhead and latency reduction,
beam selection accuracy improvement.
4) For NR supporting non-terrestrial networks, the beam
management procedures may need to be modiﬁed [30]. NR
beam management for mobility between spot-beams on the
same BS cannot be ported to satellite to minimize the handoff
overhead, because it usually assumes that adjacent beams of
the same BS can use the same frequency, but for adjacent
beams of the same satellite, different frequencies or different
polarizations may be used.
5) For NR Integrated Access and Backhaul (IAB), beam
failure recovery and radio link failure procedures are beneﬁ-
cial and should be supported and enhanced [31]. It mainly
includes two enhancements that should be considered for
IAB nodes: Enhancement to support interaction between beam
failure recovery success indication and radio link failure;
Enhancement to existing beam management procedures for
faster beam switching/coordination/recovery to avoid backhaul
link outages.
B. Beam Management in IEEE
MmWave frequency, particularly at unlicensed 60 GHz
band, has received great attention in the last decade from
WLAN and WPAN communities. Speciﬁcally, three IEEE
standards of mmWave have been designed, i.e., IEEE
802.11ad, 802.11ay, and 802.15.3c, where the 802.11ay is
an enhancement of the 802.11ad standard. In these IEEE
standards, the procedure for beam alignment is known as
beamforming training (BFT). The BFT aims at selecting
the best beamforming/combining vectors from a pre-deﬁned
codebook without explicit estimation of the channel. A two-
stage BFT operation is utilized: coarse-grained beam training
(named sector1 sweeping in 802.11ad/ay and low-resolution
beam training in 802.15.3c) and ﬁne-grained beam training
(named beam reﬁnement in 802.11ad/ay and high-resolution
beam training in 802.15.3c).
⋆BFT in IEEE 802.11ad [1]: To achieve the necessary
directional multi-gigabit (DMG) link budget for subsequent
communication between two stations2 (STAs), the BFT in
802.11ad WLAN is split into two phases: sector-level sweep
(SLS) and beam reﬁnement protocol (BRP). The BFT starts
with a SLS from the initiator, who refers to the DMG STA that
commences the beamforming. A BRP may follow, if requested
by either the initiator or the responder (the DMG STA that is
the recipient). After the successful completion of BFT, the
best reﬁned beam pair is used for communication between
the two participating DMG STAs. During data transmission,
beam tracking is optionally employed to adjust for channel
variations. In 802.11ad, the beam tracking is performed by
appending training ﬁelds for channel estimation to data pack-
ets.
• SLS phase: During this phase, the initiator periodically
transmits sector-sweep frames from pre-deﬁned sectors,
while the responder remains in omnidirectional mode and
provides feedback to the initiator on the sector received
with the highest quality during the initiator sector-sweep.
Subsequently, the two DMG STAs swap roles. It is worth
noting that SLS is mandatory and only trains the transmit
sectors of the initiator and the responder. Since imperfect
quasi-omni antenna patterns are used to ﬁnd the best sectors,
SLS can only provide coarse-grained beam training.
1A sector is a speciﬁc wide antenna radiation pattern generated by changing
the antenna weights applied to the phased array elements.
2IEEE 802.11-2007 formally deﬁnes STA as: Any device that contains an
IEEE 802.11-conformant MAC and PHY interface to the wireless medium.
6
• BRP phase: After SLS, the transmit and receive antenna
conﬁgurations can be optionally improved in BRP using an
iterative reﬁnement procedure. To further reﬁne the beam
pattern/direction, the BRP phase is implemented through
three main subphases, i.e., BRP setup, multiple sector
identiﬁer detection (MID), and beam combining (BC), as
well as one or more beam reﬁnement transactions. More
speciﬁcally, the MID reverses the scanning roles from the
transmit sector sweep, and the BC tests the transmit and
receive beams in pairwise combinations.
⋆BFT in IEEE 802.11ay [2]: The basic procedure of BFT
in 802.11ay is almost the same as that in 802.11ad standard.
However, compared with 802.11ad, 802.11ay has further en-
hanced and optimized the original DMG beamforming, making
it more ﬂexible and efﬁcient, and named it enhanced DMG
(EDMG) beamforming. One of the major advancements is that
the EDMG beamforming enables MIMO operations, including
both single-user MIMO (SU-MIMO) and downlink multi-user
MIMO (MU-MIMO), thus achieving both beamforming and
multiplexing gain. To enable MIMO communication between
an initiator and one or more responders, the SU/MU-MIMO
BFT protocol comprises two consecutive phases: single-input
single-output (SISO) phase and MIMO phase. Here the initia-
tor and responder are all EDMG STAs that are SU/MU-MIMO
capable. In addition, there are two types of beam tracking in
802.11ay. One is analog beam tracking for DMG STAs, which
is similar to that in 802.11ad. The other is digital baseband
channel tracking using digital beamforming for EDMG STAs.
• SU-MIMO BFT: The SISO phase comprises either a MIMO
BRP transmit sector sweep (TXSS) procedure or a SISO
feedback procedure, where the former is optional, and the
latter is mandatory. The purpose is to enable the initiator
to collect feedback of the last initiator TXSS (I-TXSS)
from the responder, and also enable the responder to collect
feedback of the last responder TXSS (R-TXSS) from the
initiator. The MIMO phase enables the simultaneous train-
ing of transmit and receive sectors and DMG antennas to
determine best combinations of transmit and receive sectors
and DMG antennas for SU-MIMO operation.
• MU-MIMO BFT: The SISO phase starts with an optional
I-TXSS subphase, followed by a mandatory feedback sub-
phase. During this phase, the initiator and the responders
who intend to participate in a MU group need to train
transmit and receive DMG antennas and sectors and collect
feedback. Based on SISO feedback, the initiator is required
to send a number of action frames to the responders to
perform the MIMO phase, which is comprised of four
consecutive subphases, namely, beamforming setup, BFT,
beamforming feedback, and beamforming selection.
⋆BFT in IEEE 802.15.3c [3]: To ﬁnd the best pair of
beam patterns between two devices (DEVs) with a given beam
resolution, a two-level beam training is used in 802.15.3c
WPAN, which consists of a sector level and beam level train-
ing. The space area of interest will be limited by sector level
training, and then the best pair of sectors (or low-resolution
beams) will be sliced into high-resolution beams to prepare
for beam level training. Since the channel characteristics are
time-varying, 802.15.3c, similar to 802.11ad/ay, also contains
a beam tracking phase, which is used to track the best beam
patterns between the two DEVs and to improve connectivity.
• Sector level training: During this phase, the transmitter
(DEV1) sends sector training sequences over all possible
sector directions sequentially, while the receiver (DVE2)
attempts to listen to the training sequences using different
receive directions/sectors. In this way, DVE2 is able to
identify which transmit sector of DVE1 has the highest
quality. The procedure is then reversed to determine the
best transmit-receive sector pair.
• Beam level training: This phase explores beams within
the best sectors to ﬁnd the best beam pair for the two
DEVs. For that, DEV1 transmits repetitions of a beam
training sequence over each possible beam direction within
the obtained best transmit sector, while DEV2 monitors the
training sequences using different receive beams and then
selects the optimal beam pair, i.e., DVE1’s best transmit
beam and DVE2’s best receive beam. After exchanging
roles, a similar beam training from DVE2 to DVE1 takes
place. Through beam feedback, the two DVEs can know
their optimal beam directions.
C. Related Survey Papers
In the early years, there were some reviews on beam
management, especially beamforming, but they did not cover
the new technologies that have emerged in recent years. At
present, although there are some surveys on speciﬁc ﬁelds
that involve beam management issues, the content is relatively
limited. There are very few surveys dedicated to beam man-
agement, but most are only for AI, and some of the latest
achievements such as multi-agent collaboration are not in-
cluded. With the rapid development of technology, in addition
to AI, some new advanced technologies have emerged, such as
ISAC and RIS, for which no comprehensive review on beam
management has been found.
Table II displays a comparison between the survey paper
at hand and a collection of other surveys covering beam-
management-related literature. The ﬁndings of this study are
analyzed below in more detail.
One of the key techniques of beam management is an-
tenna beamforming, which is essentially a spatial ﬁltering
operation typically using an array of radiators to radiate or
capture energy in a speciﬁc direction over its aperture. The
gain realized through beamforming can compensate for the
high free-space path loss and penetration loss of mmWave
signals. Shajahan Kutty et al. [32] presented a holistic view
of antenna beamforming techniques till mid 2015 for mmWave
communications. The scope includes description of mmWave
beamforming architectures, signal processing algorithms, and
RF system design and implementation aspects with particular
emphasis on beamforming for IEEE 802.15.3c WPAN, IEEE
802.11ad WLAN and some outdoor applications. Beamform-
ing architectures are grouped into three categories: analog,
digital, and hybrid beamforming. To keep a low complexity
and implementation cost, hybrid analog-digital beamforming
has emerged as a leading contender for outdoor mmWave
communications, especially in massive MIMO systems [44],
7
TABLE II
EXISTING SURVEYS ON BEAM-MANAGEMENT-RELATED TOPICS AND OUR NEW CONTRIBUTIONS.
Ref.
Year
Focus of Discussion
Frequency
Advanced Approaches
mmWave
THz
AI
RIS
Sensing
[32]
2016
Tracked the evolution of antenna beamforming for mmWave communications and focused on
mmWave channel characteristics and indoor use.
✓
[33]
2017
Provided a survey of hybrid beamforming in massive MIMO systems, and focused on hybrid
beamforming structures on the basis of the CSI types (instantaneous or average).
✓
[34]
2018
Provided a review of hybrid beamforming in mmWave massive MIMO systems, and focused on
the implementation, signal processing, and application aspects.
✓
[35]
2018
Provided an overview of key features pertaining to CSI reporting and beam management for the
5G NR standardized in 3GPP Release 15.
✓
[36]
2018
Presented some technical challenges for mmWave communications in IEEE 802.11ay standard-
ization activities, especially the enhancements of beam training to 802.11ad.
✓
[37]
2019
Presented a tutorial on beam management frameworks for 3GPP NR and focused on the
measurement techniques for beam and mobility management in Release 15.
✓
[26]
2020
Provided an overview on the standardized MIMO framework supporting beam management and
CSI acquisition in 5G NR and focused on the beam management procedures standardized in
3GPP Releases 15 and 16.
✓
Partially
[38]
2021
Provided an overview of the beam-level and cell-level mobility management in 5G mmWave
V2X communications and focused on overcoming mobility interruption.
✓
Partially
Partially
[39]
2021
Surveyed the mmWave system hardware technologies, and investigated the hierarchical search
and Bayesian ﬁlter-based beam management algorithms.
✓
Partially
[40]
2022
Presented a survey of beam alignment and initial access in mmWave and THz 5G/6G systems
and highlighted the new trends towards deploying RISs and DL approaches.
✓
✓
Partially
Partially
[41]
2022
Adopted a structured approach to describe the various Wi-Fi areas where ML is applied and
showed that ML has a positive impact on beamforming.
✓
Partially
[42]
2022
Provided a comprehensive review on PMN using the ISAC/JCAS techniques and investigated
the sensing-assisted beamforming.
✓
Partially
[43]
2023
Provided an overview of the existing ML-based mmWave/THz beam management techniques.
✓
✓
Partially
This work
Presents a comprehensive survey on the state-of-the-art beam management schemes for 6G
communications.
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
[45]. Andreas F. Molisch et al. [33] provided a comprehensive
survey of the various incarnations of such hybrid multiple-
antenna transceiver structures that have been proposed in the
literature till 2016. Irfan Ahmed et al. [34] also provided a
review of hybrid beamforming methods, both existing and
proposed till the ﬁrst quarter of 2017. In comparison, the
previous survey on hybrid beamforming [33] tends to focus
on beamforming structures on the basis of the channel state
information (CSI) types (instantaneous or average), while the
latter paper [34] focuses on the implementation, signal pro-
cessing, and application aspects of the hybrid beamforming.
Besides mmWave beamforming [46], some papers surveyed
the beam management process in the aspects of 5G stan-
dardization. Eko Onggosanusi et al. [35] provided a good
overview of modular and high-resolution CSI acquisition and
beam management procedures such as measurement, report-
ing, and recovery for 5G NR globally standardized by the
3GPP in Release 15. In [37], which is a tutorial on the
design and dimensioning of beam management frameworks
for 5G cellular networks, Marco Giordani et al. reviewed the
most relevant downlink and uplink measurement signals sup-
ported by 3GPP Release 15 for beam management purposes
and presented three measurement collection frameworks for
both initial access and tracking purposes. The three consid-
ered measurement schemes are standalone-downlink scheme,
non-standalone-downlink scheme, and non-standalone-uplink
scheme, where the standalone/non-standalone architecture is
a deployment conﬁguration of NR networks. In the same
year, they compared the performance of standalone and non-
standalone deployments for the beam management of users
in both connected and idle modes [47]. It showed that a
non-standalone conﬁguration exploiting multi-connectivity can
offer more potential, including improving end-to-end perfor-
mance in mmWave networks, ensuring higher resilience and
improved reactiveness in case of link failure, and reducing
the impact of beam reporting overhead. Meanwhile, not only
5G cellular networks, but also WLANs are widely concerned
about mmWave communications. Several mmWave WLAN
standards have been designed such as IEEE 802.11ad and
its evolution standard IEEE 802.11ay. Pei Zhou et al. [36]
highlighted some MAC-related technologies in IEEE 802.11ad
and presented some technical challenges for mmWave com-
munications in the IEEE 802.11ay standardization activities,
especially the beamforming training for both SU-MIMO and
MU-MIMO.
These above papers provide an excellent survey on mmWave
beam management, but they are not recent achievements and
do not address emerging 6G technologies. Typically, AI-
based methods are drawing unparalleled research interest. AI
including ML/DL algorithms is a tool to help network to make
a quicker and wiser decision based on training data in the
past. Researchers are exploring the potential of AI to solve
problems speciﬁc to the mobile networking domain. For beam
management, AI can be applied in the two aspects, beam-
forming training and beam tracking, as investigated in [26],
[38]–[40]. Yu-Ngok Ruyue Li et al. [26] provided overview
of beam management procedure in 3GPP NR Releases 15 and
16 and particularly considered the topic of AI-based beam
management for future beam prediction in 3GPP standard.
Abdulkadir Kose et al. [38] summarized the ML-based beam
mobility management approaches proposed in the literature
until 2020, and mainly surveyed the cell-level and beam-level
mobility management in 5G mmWave vehicle-to-everything
(V2X in short) communications focusing on the URLLC
8
requirements. Jihoon Bang et al. [39] provided a well bal-
anced understanding of hardware technologies for prototyping
and signal processing techniques for beam management in
mmWave communication systems, but only a small part of the
paper involves the ML/DL-based algorithms. Wissal Attaoui et
al. [40] highlighted the ML/DL viewpoint to enable fast initial
access and reliable beam alignment in 5G communications
and beyond. These papers have more or less investigated the
ML/DL-based beam management mechanism, but they have
not yet covered the new promising technologies such as FL,
TL, and split learning. For WLANs empowered by IEEE
802.11 (Wi-Fi), Szymon Szott et al. [41] provided an overview
of the general future research directions in applying AI for
improving Wi-Fi performance. The research has shown that
AI methods can have a positive impact on the beamforming
in indoor Wi-Fi scenarios, and the new techniques, FL and TL,
are discussed as future trends because they provide opportuni-
ties to distribute learning tasks and improve training speed.
In [43], M. Qurratulain Khan et al. provided an overview
of the existing ML-based mmWave/THz beam management
techniques, which includes the existing FL-based studies.
Not only the AI technologies, but also the RIS has attracted
extensive attention in recent years [48]–[51], especially in
overcoming blockage issues in mmWave/THz communication
networks for future generation such as 6G. However, the use
of RIS poses a challenge to beam management because of
the need to jointly coordinate and manage the transmission
of two hops. This challenge will be more severe in the RIS-
assisted mobile communication scenarios, in which multi-
point beam switching will become a major problem and new
techniques and analytical approaches are required to maintain
connectivity between various network connection points. The
aforementioned survey [38] described in detail only one beam-
based mobility management method proposed by Chenglu Jia
et al. [52] in 2020. In [40], the authors provided the solutions
proposed to solve the beam alignment in THz communications
with the importance of using RIS. More recently, sensing-
assisted beam management is emerging as an attractive so-
lution for the ISAC systems with harmonized and integrated
communication and sensing functions. Some related work has
been investigated by J. Andrew Zhang et al. [42], who also
discussed some major problems that have not yet been tackled
to make the sensing-aided beamforming practical. In [42], AI
and RIS are also mentioned, but they are not described for
beam management.
Although the existing surveys have done a good work
in the basics, techniques, features, and challenges of beam
management from different perspectives, the new approaches
proposed to tackle the beam management for 6G mmWave
and THz communications have not been cited or are not
exhaustive, especially for ISAC and systems integrated with
RIS, and more investigations are required.
III. ENABLING-TECHNOLOGY-BASED 6G BEAM
MANAGEMENT: STATE-OF-THE-ART
In this section, we provide a comprehensive survey on
the state-of-the-art 6G beam management mechanisms. More
speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst present the potential beneﬁts of the
expected enabling technologies for mmWave and THz commu-
nications, i.e., AI, ISAC, and RIS. Then, according to the en-
abling technologies, we roughly classify the research work on
beam management into the AI-based methods, sensing-based
methods for ISAC, and methods for RIS-assisted networks,
which is revealed in Fig. 3. The visions of their combination
are also discussed. Finally, summary and insights are provided
at the end of this section.
A. Technology Enablers
⋆Why AI? AI is an interdisciplinary science with multiple
approaches that allow machines to model, and even improve
upon, the capabilities of the human mind. With the advent
of the big data era, the growth of various software and
hardware computing resources, and the advancements in ML
and DL, AI has become a ﬁeld with active research topics and
practical applications thanks to its agility and effectiveness,
especially in dealing with dynamics and uncertainty of large-
scale problems. Fig. 4 shows the history and key timelines of
AI. In recent years, AI techniques have been broadly adopted
to enhance the performance of wireless communications, in
particular, in highly dynamic networks (e.g., V2X), and have
achieved unprecedented success in many aspects such as mo-
bility management, network load and resource management,
channel estimation, etc. For mmWave/THz communications,
integration with AI has three main advantages.
• The complex relationships between diverse nonlinear
sources in practical scenarios can be accurately modeled
by AI, which can be exploited to promote effective
beam management [54]. By contrast, in order to facili-
tate processing, traditional mathematical methods usually
idealize some conditions and ignore the nonlinear factors
in the real world.
• Due to the mobility of users and scatterers, it is necessary
to dynamically adjust the optimal beam direction(s) to
prevent blockage events, but the conventional methods
based on beam (re-)sweeping face high overhead. Since
AI can adapt to the dynamic ﬂuctuations of the envi-
ronment well, AI-based approaches can detect blockages
and ﬁnd bypassing beam pairs by using the location and
sensory information of the surrounding environment.
• The optimal beam direction for mmWave/THz communi-
cation is usually determined by the high-dimensional fea-
ture space formed by numerous scatterers with different
positions, sizes and shapes in the wireless environment.
AI may be used to extract high-dimensional environmen-
tal features to assist beam management.
⋆Why ISAC? With the proliferation of the IoT and
Tactile Internet, a large number of sensors and actuators with
different functions, such as radar, light detection and ranging
(LiDAR), and cameras, are connected to mobile networks.
This promotes the evolution of mobile network capability
from mere communication to ISAC. In order to efﬁciently
provide both communication and sensing (C&S) services,
various designs on ISAC system architecture, ISAC waveform,
and transmit beamforming are in full swing. At present, to help
9
 6G Beam Management
Collaborative 
Training
AI-Empowered
Independent 
Training
Supervised 
Learning
Reinforcement 
Learning
Fully Connected Neural Network
Long-Short Term Memory
Convolutional Neural Network
Conventional ML
Multi-Armed Bandits
Markov Decision Process
Federated Learning
Split Learning
Transfer Learning
Parallel Learning
ISAC-Enabled
Radar Sensing
Communication Signal Sensing
C&S Hybrid Signal Sensing
Hiring Dedicated Sensors
Wi-Fi Sensing
5G NR Sensing
RIS-Enhanced
Beam Sweeping
AI-driven Methods
Sensing-aided Methods
Exhaustive Search
Hierarchical Search
Multi-beam Search
Others
Fig. 3. Classiﬁcation of existing algorithms for beam management.
Turing Test
AI
Deep Blue
Siri
FL
The network data 
analytics function-5G 
network AI (NWDAF) 
FL technology 
standard was approved 
by 3GPP R17.
 IEEE Std 3652.1™-2020
released the  FL standard.
The term
ćArtificial IntelligenceĈ
was coined by John 
McCarthy.
A test (originally 
called the imitation 
game) proposed by 
Alan M. Turing to 
determine whether a 
computer can “think.”
On May 11,
1997, 
an IBM 
computer 
called IBM  
Deep Blue
beat the 
world 
chess 
champion 
after a 
six-game
 match
ChatGPT
A chess computer built 
by IBM, which made the 
history that a computer 
won a game against a 
world champion for the 
first time.
Apple integrated a 
speech recognition 
interface, Siri, into 
iPhone 4S to respond 
to spoken commands 
and questions.
The first computer 
program to defeat a Go 
world champion, which 
combines advanced 
search tree with deep 
neural networks.
A chat robot launched by 
OpenAI. Its release 
caused an unprecedented 
tornado in the field of 
science and technology in 
the world. 
1950
1955
1997
2011
2017
2020
2021
FL
2022
AlphaGo
Fig. 4. Roadmap to edge AI. In particular, 3GPP R17 introduced AI’s FL technology in the global 5G communication ﬁeld for the ﬁrst time, and IEEE Std
3652.1TM-2020 [53] approved the ﬁrst FL standard.
wireless communication decision-making, ISAC has aroused
interest in different use cases, such as autonomous driving,
drone, and virtual/augmented/extended reality (VR/AR/XR).
ISAC is envisioned to be an integral part of future wireless
systems, especially when operating at the mmWave and THz
frequency bands. In particular, leveraging sensory data to
guide mmWave/THz beam management problem has gained
increasing interest for the following reasons:
• Sensing could provide environment-awareness to com-
munications, with potentials to improve security and
performance. Sensing information about the surrounding
environment, such as the geometry of scatterers and
the locations/directions of transmitters/receivers, can help
with beam tracking, blockage prediction or proactive
handoff.
• The sensing information can be used to identify promising
beamforming directions and avoid extensive (blind) beam
training, and can also potentially help the mmWave/THz
transceiver manage its beams to avoid interference with
adjacent users. By periodically monitoring the loca-
tion/direction of the target user, the AP/BS can track the
user’s beams and model its movement pattern.
• In highly mobile communication scenarios, like V2X,
UAVs [55] and high-speed trains, mmWave/THz channels
are highly dynamic, and the communication link needs to
be reconﬁgured frequently, which requires a large training
overhead. The sensing-assisted strategy can signiﬁcantly
reduce this overhead, which is particularly useful in NLoS
scenarios.
⋆Why RIS? RIS, which is generally a planar surface
consisting of a large number of low-cost and passive reﬂecting
elements, can help reshape the wireless channel/radio prop-
agation environment in a programmable manner. By densely
deploying RISs in wireless network and skillfully coordinating
their reﬂections, the radio signal propagation between trans-
mitters and receivers can be ﬂexibly reconﬁgured to achieve
the desired realization and/or distribution. Recent research
progress shows that RIS, as an auxiliary device, has great
potential in improving spectral and energy efﬁciency, reducing
interference, enhancing physical security, and so on, which
thus improves the capacity and reliability of the RIS-assisted
system. Due to the increasing number of active antennas/RF
chains, mmWave/THz system incurs signiﬁcantly higher en-
ergy consumption and hardware cost than sub-6 GHz wireless
systems. Meanwhile, the mmWave/THz communication links
are more susceptible to blockage and suffer from higher prop-
agation loss in general. These critical issues can be efﬁciently
tackled by properly deploying RISs in the system.
• On the one hand, since RIS can passively reﬂect impinging
signals to the desired direction by phase shifters, it can be
operated in a green and low-carbon way without involving
any sophisticated signal processing, and thus the energy
consumption can be reduced by orders of magnitude
compared with traditional active antenna arrays.
• On the other hand, when the direct link between an
access point (AP)/BS and its served user is not feasible
due to severe pathloss or blockage, an RIS-aided virtual
line-of-sight (LoS) link (i.e., AP/BS-RIS-user) can be
10
TABLE III
CLASSIFICATION OF AI-BASED BEAM MANAGEMENT SOLUTIONS FOR
MMWAVE AND THZ COMMUNICATIONS.
Model Training Mode
AI Techniques
References
Independent Traning
Supervised Learning
[56]–[74]
Reinforcement Learning
[21], [75]–[90]
Collaborative Training
Federated Learning
[23], [91]–[98]
Split Learning
[99]
Transfer Learning
[61], [100]–[102]
Parallel Learning
[103]–[105]
created, which can bypass major obstacles, and thereby
signiﬁcantly enhance their communication performance.
• Compared to conventional systems, the implementation
of RIS in 6G is particularly suitable for beam alignment,
because the signals reﬂected from all the elements in the
RIS to the receiver can be phase aligned.
B. AI-Empowered Beam Management
Beam management based on AI algorithms can automat-
ically extract and apply relevant information from previous
results to limit the subsequent search area. As a result,
empowering the beam management process with intelligence
is a potential technique for reducing overhead. Meanwhile,
the prediction accuracy of such methods is superior to con-
ventional technologies. In this subsection, we give a overview
of AI-empowered beam management techniques for mmWave
and THz communications. Various studies on AI-empowered
beam management have been reported, and their classiﬁcation
is revealed in Table III. The training modes of AI models in
existing studies can be roughly divided into two categories,
namely independent training and collaborative training. In
independent training, each AI model for beam management
is trained by only one party/agent for a typical task. The
AI technologies used include supervised learning (SL) and
reinforcement learning (RL). In contrast, training involving
multiple parties or multiple models and tasks is called col-
laborative training, of which the main architectures include
FL, split learning, TL, and parallel learning. The detailed
description is as follows.
Independent Training. To realize the intelligence in beam
management, various AI techniques have been developed and
adopted. AI [106] inherits the three basic ML paradigms
including SL, unsupervised learning, and RL. The common
paradigms introduced in beam management are SL and RL.
Speciﬁcally, SL uses labeled data for training and is usually
applied to applications with enough historical data. Its goal
is to learn a function that maps feature vectors (input) to
labels (output), based on example input-output pairs. RL is
a dynamic learning approach that maximizes the outcome
through trial and error, with a focus on ﬁnding a balance
between exploration (of uncharted territory) and exploitation
(of current knowledge). To perform SL and RL tasks for
single-agent settings, artiﬁcial neural network (ANNs), which
can be simply called NNs or neural nets, are arguably the most
important frameworks because they are capable of mimicking
human intelligence [107]. All the NNs that have multiple
hidden layers are known as deep neural networks (DNNs).
• Supervised Learning. Due to its simplicity, SL is the
most frequently used AI technique for mmWave and THz
beam management. Table IV provides a summary of the
existing AI models employed for SL-based beam management,
as well as performance metrics for evaluating the surveyed
efforts. Most popular AI models utilized are fully connected
neural network (FCNN), long short-term memory (LSTM),
convolutional neural network (CNN), and conventional ML,
among which FCNN, LSTM and CNN are different types of
NNs.
1) Fully Connected Neural Network. FCNN is an NN
consisting solely of fully-connected neural network layers,
where a fully-connected layer refers to a neural network in
which each input node is connected to each output node. In
[57], P. Zhou et al. proposed to use DNN for performing
the beam management and interference coordination in dense
mmWave WLAN, and designed a BFT information aided
algorithm based on the BFT mechanism in IEEE 802.11ay
to generate the training data for the DNN model. Considering
a vehicular scenario, K. Satyanarayana et al. [58] employed
a ﬁngerprint-based database for low-complexity beam align-
ment, where the ﬁngerprint is comprised of a set of possible
beam pairs (i.e., the angle-of-arrival and the angle-of-departure
pairs, AoA-AoD pairs) for a given location, and invoked a
feedforward neural network, namely the softmax linear classi-
ﬁer, for intelligently selecting the ﬁngerprints. Experimental
results in [108]–[111] have veriﬁed that some knowledge
of sub-6 GHz channels can be used to assist system and
network operations under mmWaves, mainly due to the spatial
correlation between the two frequency bands. M. Alrabeiah
et al. [61] exploited DNN to learn the mapping functions
that can predict the optimal mmWave beam and blockage
status directly from the sub-6 GHz channel. In addition to
sub-6 GHz CSI, user location is often utilized to maintain
a database and train AI models to map this information for
beam prediction. S. Rezaie et al. [70] presented a DNN-based
initial beam alignment method, which uses only the location
and orientation information of the user as input. By carefully
observing the DNN structures in the algorithms proposed in
the above studies, it can be seen that they all FCNNs. It is
important to note that although side/contextual information
such as the geometric property of the environment and user
location and orientation can greatly reduce beam management
overhead, obtaining this information comes at a cost, which
may mean additional overhead or implementation costs for the
system. Fortunately, the upcoming ISAC systems for 6G will
facilitate the context-aware beam management.
2) Long Short-Term Memory. As an extended version of
recurrent neural networks (RNNs), LSTM is widely used
for modeling time series data. An LSTM contains LSTM
units, each of which has a memory cell for storing features
extracted from the sequence data using recurrent connections.
The key to a common LSTM unit is the cell state, which
is protected and controlled via three gates: an input gate, an
output gate, and a forget gate. LSTM has been successfully
applied to enhance the beam management process due to its
ability to learn long-term dependencies. For a UAV commu-
nication scenario, W. Yuan et al. [62] developed an LSTM-
11
TABLE IV
AI MODELS EMPLOYED FOR SL-BASED BEAM MANAGEMENT MECHANISMS.
Models
Ref.
Year
Focus
Model Input
Model Output
Performance Metrics
Fully
Connected
Neural
Network
[57]
2019
Beam management,
Interference coordination
SNR
Binary association matrix,
beamwidth matrix,
power allocation matrix
• Sum-rate ratio
• Computation time ratio
[58]
2019
Beam alignment
User location, trafﬁc density,
received signal strength
Probabilities associated with
AoA-AoD pairs
• Received signal strength
[61]
2020
Beam and blockage
prediction
Sub-6GHz channel vectors
Probability distribution over
all the available classes
• Prediction accuracy
• Spectral efﬁciency
• Average achievable rate
[65]
2021
Iterative
beam-user selection
Channel matrix
Selected beam-user pairs
• Energy efﬁciency
• Spectral efﬁciency
[70]
2022
Probabilistic
beam selection
Coordinates and orientations
of user
All possible beam pairs
• Misalignment probability
• Effective spectral efﬁciency
Long-Short
Term
Memory
[62]
2020
Predictive beamforming
Angle sequences
Predicted altitude angle
• CDF of angle estimation error
• Communication rate
[67]
2021
Calibrated beam training
Received signals of current
and prior beam training
Predicted probabilities
• Narrow beam prediction loss
• Normalized beamforming gain
• CDF of predicted beam gain
[68]
2021
Beam tracking
Previous channel estimates,
sensor measurements,
user’s situation
Channel estimate
• Bit error rate
• Normalized mean square error
[69]
2022
Beam tracking
Results of Kalman ﬁltering
Cell state
• Beam tracking accuracy
• Spectrum efﬁciency
[72]
2022
Beam selection
Signal strength,
user location and velocity
The selected beam
• Relative ratio of signal strength
Convolutional
Neural
Network
[60]
2020
Beam alignment
Received signal vectors
Beam distribution vector
• Spectral efﬁciency
[63]
2021
Beam quality estimation
Low-resolution image of
received pilot signal power
High-resolution beam image
• CDF of SNR
[67]
2021
Calibrated beam training
Normalized
received signal vector
Predicted probabilities
• Narrow beam prediction loss
• Normalized beamforming gain
• CDF of predicted beam gain
[73]
2023
Beam training
Signal vector
Estimated probability of the
optimal near-ﬁeld codeword
• Normalized SNR
• Effective achievable rate
[74]
2023
Multi-ﬁnger beam training
Training measurements
Prediction probability of
the optimal beam
• Misalignment probability
• Spectrum efﬁciency
Conventional
ML
[56]
2018
Analog beam selection
Channel feature vector
Optimal analog beam
• Average uplink sum-rate
• Complexity
[59]
2020
Analog beam selection
Data samples based on
propagation paths
Hyperplane separation
coefﬁcients between codewords
• Average sum rate
• Computational complexity
[64]
2021
Beam alignment
Experiences with beam
index and coordinates
Beam conﬁdence interval
• Effective achievable rate
• Probability of alignment success
[66]
2021
Beam prediction
Coordinates of users
Optimal AP and beam pair
• Beam prediction accuracy
• Robustness of beam prediction
• Sensitivity of beam prediction
[71]
2022
Analog beam selection
Samples based on
channel model
Index of analog beam
• Achievable sum rate
• Computational complexity
• Effectiveness (CDF)
CDF: cumulative distribution function
based predictive beamforming algorithm to address the beam
misalignment caused by UAV jittering, where the prediction
model is trained by exploiting the temporal features from the
sequential angle data. To reduce the beam training overhead
of mmWave MIMO system, K. Ma et al. [67] ﬁrst leveraged
CNN to implement the optimal narrow beam prediction based
on the instantaneous received signals of wide beam training,
and then utilized LSTM to track the movement of UE and
further calibrated the predicted beam direction. In [68], S. H.
Lim et al. proposed an enhanced beam tracking method that
models rapidly-varying mmWave channels due to the motion
of UE, where an LSTM was employed to describe the temporal
evolution of the AoAs and AoDs based on the sequence
of the previous channel estimates and inertial measurement
unit measurements. Meanwhile, the proposed LSTM-based
prediction model was incorporated into a sequential Bayesian
ﬁltering framework to update the channel estimate. To balance
the beam tracking accuracy and overheads for UAV-assisted
high-speed railway wireless communications, L. Yan et al. [69]
proposed to combine Kalman ﬁltering with LSTM. In the dou-
ble high-mobility scenario, varying Kalman ﬁltering update
periods were used under different beam angular variations,
where a long update period was used in the slow beam angle
changing areas to reduce the beam tracking overheads, and a
short update period was used in the fast beam angle changing
areas to enhance tracking accuracy. The authors then employed
LSTM to further improve the beam tracking accuracy by
taking the estimation results of Kalman ﬁltering as training
data. In [72], T. T. Nguyen et al. investigated an LSTM-
based beam selection framework with a capability of missing
data imputation, where a DNN with signal strength and user
location as inputs was used to predict the missing data, and
the predicted signal strength and the geographical information
were used as the LSTM inputs to select the suitable beam.
3) Convolutional Neural Network. Although FCNN can be
used for learning features and classifying data, this architecture
is generally impractical for larger inputs that require massive
numbers of neurons. Some modern NNs, such as CNNs,
have used partial connections to streamline their connec-
tion manners. CNNs use a mathematical operation called
convolution in place of general matrix multiplication in at
least one of their layers. Convolution reduces the number
12
of free parameters, thus allowing the network to be deeper.
Some CNN-based approaches have been exploited for more
efﬁcient beam management purposes. In [60], W. Ma et al.
proposed a beam alignment method using CNN for an uplink
multi-user mmWave massive MIMO system, where the CNN
was trained using simulated environments according to the
mmWave channel model and then deployed to predict the
beam distribution vector using partial beams. Based on wide
beam measurements, H. Echigo et al. [63] reduced the training
overhead of narrow beams by utilizing a CNN, in which the
spatial correlation in beam quality was applied to improve
estimation accuracy. Meanwhile, to reduce the frequency of
beam training, they designed a beam quality prediction model
to capture spatiotemporal correlations with a convolutional
LSTM network. Instead of coarse scanning with wide beams,
Y. Liu et al. [74] proposed a multi-ﬁnger training scheme to
take a limited number of initial measurements, wherein a cus-
tomized CNN was leveraged to extract hidden features from
the received measurements for angular direction prediction
and candidate beam selection. In large-scale massive MIMO
system, codebook-based beam training is widely adopted to
enhance the beamforming gain, but the overhead is very high.
This is because the near-ﬁeld region [112] of the system is
extended, so that both the angle and distance from the BS to
the user need to be considered in the codebook design, which
is different from the far-ﬁeld region. To reduce the overhead,
W. Liu et al. [73] designed two NNs with convolutional
modules to estimate the angle and distance of the optimal
near-ﬁeld beam based on the received signals of the far-ﬁeld
wide beams.
4) Conventional ML. In addition to the advanced AI algo-
rithms such as LSTMs and CNNs, several conventional AI/ML
techniques have also been employed for beam management,
[56], [59], [64], [66], [71], with support vector machine (SVM)
being the most favored one. Compared to newer AI algorithms
like NNs, SVM has the advantages of higher speed and better
performance with a limited number of samples. The main
idea behind SVM is to utilize orthogonal vectors to construct
a hyperplane or a set of hyperplanes in a high or inﬁnite-
dimensional space that maximally separates the different
classes in the training data. SVM excels in analyzing data for
both classiﬁcation and regression tasks, but generally, it works
best in classiﬁcation problems. Taking this as an opportunity,
some efforts have been made to model analog beam selection
as a classiﬁcation problem and train the classiﬁer by SVM
algorithm. In [56], Y. Long et al. considered an uplink massive
MIMO system with hybrid beamforming, and exploited SVM
to classify the uplink channels of each user to several different
types, with each type corresponding to a candidate for the
analog beam. In general, each user’s analog beam has more
than two candidates, which leads to an imbalance in the train-
ing data for an one-vs-the-rest classiﬁer. To overcome it, they
proposed a biased-SVM algorithm, where the major and minor
training data used different error penalties, and then obtained
a statistical classiﬁcation model that maximizes the sum rate.
In [71], the analog beam selection and user scheduling in a
downlink MU-MIMO hybrid mmWave system were jointly
studied to maximize the achievable sum rate. According to
the channel correlation, the users were clustered based on
the K-means algorithm. After user clustering, the cluster-and-
beam mapping problem was reformulated as a multi-class
classiﬁcation problem, in which the multi-class classiﬁer was
trained via the biased-SVM algorithm. In [59], Y. Yang et
al. proposed an SVM-based analog beam selection approach
to obtain the average sum rate of mmWave vehicle-to-vehicle
(V2V) concurrent communications, using an iterative one-to-
one SVM classiﬁer to combat the imbalanced training samples
to improve the accuracy of beam prediction for each vehicle
user. These research results indicate that SVM algorithms can
choose the analog beams with low complexity and produce
signiﬁcant accuracy with less computation power, which is
why they are highly preferred.
• Reinforcement Learning. Although simple, SL lacks in-
teraction with the environment, requiring a huge number of
training samples to ensure excellent performance, which limits
its application. RL [113], by contrast, is more versatile and
suitable for general application scenarios because it does not
need labeling and can operate in a truly autonomous manner.
The typical framing of a RL scenario: an agent takes actions
in an environment, which is interpreted into a reward and a
representation of the state, which are fed back into the agent.
Simply put, RL is about learning the optimal action in an
environment to obtain maximum reward. Basic RL can be
frequently modeled as a multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem
or a Markov decision process (MDP), which has been widely
studied to enhance the performance of beam management, as
shown in Table V. In fact, the bandit problem is formally
equivalent to a one-state MDP.
1) Multi-Armed Bandit. MAB [114], a lightweight RL
technique, is simple but very powerful for making decisions
over time under uncertainty. The MAB problem is sometimes
referred to as the K-armed bandit problem. In the basic model,
an algorithm has K possible actions to choose from, a.k.a.
arms, and T rounds. In each round, the algorithm chooses an
arm and observes some reward for the choice it made. The
goal is to maximize its cumulative reward by dynamically
balancing the exploitation of those arms that have yielded high
rewards in the past with the exploration of untried arms. In the
literature, beam management problems have been addressed
using different MAB variants, e.g., in [75]–[78], [82], [83].
More speciﬁcally, most efforts leverage the MAB capability
to improve beam alignment performance for mmWave point-
to-point communication systems. M. B. Booth et al. [75]
developed a beam alignment and tracking algorithm for time-
varying mmWave channels using a Bayesian MAB beam selec-
tion policy, and tracked the channel through sparse Bayesian
learning integrated with a Kalman ﬁlter. W. Wu et al. [76]
proposed a hierarchical beam alignment scheme utilizing the
correlation structure among beams and the prior knowledge
on the channel ﬂuctuation to accelerate the process of iden-
tifying the optimal beam pair. They formulated the beam
alignment problem as a stochastic MAB problem for stationary
environments, with the goal of sequentially selecting beams
to maximize the cumulative received signal strength over a
certain period of time. In [77], J. Zhang et al. also formulated
the problem of beam alignment and tracking into a stochastic
13
TABLE V
AI MODELS EMPLOYED FOR RL-BASED BEAM MANAGEMENT MECHANISMS.
Models
Ref.
Year
Focus
Model Action
Model Reward
Performance Metrics
Multi-Armed
Bandit
[75]
2019
Beam alignment
and tracking
Optimal training beamformer
Receive SNR
• Normalized beamforming gain
• Physical angle for tracking
[76]
2019
Beam alignment
Current optimal beam
Noisy
received signal strength
• Cumulative regret
• Measurement complexity
• Beam detection accuracy/latency
[77]
2020
Beam alignment
and tracking
A pair of integers consisting
of beam index difference
and number of beams
Effective achievable rate
• Effective achievable rate
• Probability of alignment success
[78]
2020
Beam alignment
Beamforming vector index
Received SNR
• Outage probability
• Regret (Reward difference/loss)
• Minimum number of iterations
[82]
2021
Beam selection
Subset of beams
Expected amount of
data received
• Cumulative/aggregate received data
• Average contact time
• Convergence speed and learning time
[83]
2021
Beamwidth
optimization
Codebook and beamwidth
Effective achievable rate
• Probability of successful alignment
• Average effective achievable rate
Markov
Decision
Process
[21]
2021
User-centric
association
BSs/beams
User achievable rate,
network load balance
• Convergence
• User achievable rate
• User load on each BS
[79]
2021
Beam training
Beam subset
Effective achievable rate
• Average effective achievable sum-rate
• Probability of successful alignment
[81]
2021
Beam selection and
digital precoding
Beam
Sum-rate, beam energy,
approximation of SINR,
average energy of each user
• Convergence
• Achievable system sum-rate
• Generalization ability
[85]
2022
Beam training
Set of beam pair indexes
Null
• Average spectral efﬁciency
• Average total data delivered
[86]
2022
Beam tracking
Beam direction
Received signal power
• Robustness
• Average received signal power
[88]
2022
Beam alignment
Beam alignment conﬁguration
Average rate
• Average sum rate evolution
• CDF of observed rates
[89]
2022
Beam tracking
Index of angular bin
Correlation between decision
and associated optimum point
• Mean square error of AoA
[90]
2022
Beam/AoD tracking
Training beams
Estimation error rate
• Estimation error rate
• Average achievable throughput
bandit problem to maximize the expected cumulative effective
achievable rate. Instead of deﬁning each codeword/beam as
an arm, they deﬁned each arm based on the beam index
difference/offset of the two optimal beams in adjacent time
slots. Unlike the stationary bandit suitable for time-invariant
channels [76], [77], R. Gupta et al. [78] designed two beam
alignment algorithms using a non-stationary MAB model that
is especially suited for time-varying channels, with the aim
of minimizing outage probability. In the ﬁrst algorithm, a
discount factor was used for accounting the timeliness of the
state, while the second one used a state-window that slides
over time.
In conventional MAB setting, the algorithm observes only
the reward for the selected arm, and nothing else, which in
practice may result in a large performance loss and even fail
the algorithm. In contrast, the contextual bandit, an exten-
sion of the MAB, incorporates some external environment
information (called the context) into decision-making, which
enables it to be applicable to real-world applications. In
contextual bandits, the reward in each round depends on both
the context and the chosen arm. Introducing some contextual
information (e.g., location information) represents a natural
approach to adaptive beam management in complex systems
and environments. On the basis of this point, the contextual
bandits have been employed to model the problems in beam
management. Based on a contextual MAB model, D. Li et al.
[82] studied a context- and social-aware online beam allocation
scheme for mmWave vehicular communications, where the
coarse direction-of-arrival information (i.e., north, south, east,
and west) was chose as the context of a vehicle. Meanwhile,
the social structure of preferences between the neighboring
vehicles and their passengers was leveraged to improve the
beam coverage efﬁciency. For communications that require
beam alignment, the link may subject to beam drift caused by
the rapidly changing environments and the non-ideal features
inherent in practical beams. To mitigate the effect of the beam
drift, J. Zhang et al. [83] proposed a design philosophy for
beam training and data transmission in mmWave communica-
tions, where multi-resolution beams with varying beamwidths
were employed for data transmission while narrow beams
were used for beam training. Furthermore, Bayesian contextual
bandit was utilized to optimize the beamwidth for data trans-
mission, where information reﬂecting the state of the system,
including the equivalent channel coefﬁcient, beam training
overhead, transmit power, and beamforming (or array) gain,
was used as the context.
MAB has been recognized for its effectiveness in the
ﬁeld of beam management, given that it is a useful tool for
dealing with sequential decision-making problems. It must be
noted that balancing exploration and exploitation is crucial for
making optimal decisions.
2) Markov Decision Process. MDP represents a straight-
forward framing of the problem of learning from interactions
to achieve a goal, as illustrated in Fig. 5. Whereas in bandit
problems the value of each arm/action is estimated, in MDPs
the value of each action in each state or the value of each
state given optimal action selections needs to be estimated
[113]. In a classical MDP, agent can perceive the entire
environment state fully. But for most real-world mobility
applications, the environment is actually partially observable.
14
action
at
Agent
Environment
Interpreter
state
st
reward
rt
rt+1
st+1
Fig. 5. The agent-environment interaction in an MDP.
This partial observability is described by a partially observable
MDP (POMDP). The two most widely used RL algorithms to
solve the beam management problems modeled as MDPs or
POMDPs are as follows.
- Deep Q-network. The deep Q-network (DQN) represents
the optimal action-value (Q-value) function as an NN, instead
of a table as in Q-learning. Combining Q-learning with a DNN,
DQN is considered the main algorithm used in environments
with unlimited states and discrete actions. J. Zhang et al. [79]
formulated the beam training problem as an MDP, where each
action was deﬁned as a subset of the codebook for beam
training and each state was deﬁned as a matrix stacked by
the real vector formed by the modulus of all components of
the user’s equivalent channel vector. Because the states are
continuous while the actions are discrete, DQN was used to
solve the MDP. Unfortunately, one drawback to DQN is that
it sometimes substantially overestimates the values of actions.
If an overestimation do occur, this negatively affects perfor-
mance in practice. As an improvement on DQN, double DQN
(DDQN) with two NNs decomposes the max operation in the
target into action selection and action evaluation, resulting
in more stable and reliable learning [115]. In [81], the joint
design of beam selection and digital precoding for mmWave
MU-MIMO systems was investigated to maximize the sum-
rate. The beam selection problem was formulated as an MDP
and a DDQN algorithm was developed to solve it, where
the BS was treated as an agent, the selection of each beam
was modeled as an action, and the channel matrix and an
indicator tensor used for beam selection composed the state
space, of which the dimension was reduced by exploiting the
sparsity of beamspace channel. Undoubtedly, real-world tasks
more often feature incomplete and noisy state information
resulting from partial observability. Considering a user-centric
ultra-dense mmWave communication system, Q. Xue et al.
[21] modeled the decision-making process of user association
as a POMDP, applying DQN to intelligently select multiple
mmWave BSs for simultaneous access, wherein the reward
represents a compromise between the user achievable rate and
network load balance. Seriously though, by replacing the ﬁrst
fully-connected layer of DQN with a recurrent LSTM layer
of the same size, deep recurrent Q-network (DRQN) better
handles the information loss in POMDPs than does DQN
[116]. J. Park et al. [89] presented a DRQN approach for
tackling the beam tracking task in mmWave massive MIMO
system as a POMDP problem, in which the state was set to the
channel matrix, an action was related to an angular bin in the
search range, and the observation was chosen as the received
signal matrix.
- Actor-Critic. RL algorithms can be either model-free or
model-based. Two major paradigms in model-free RL are
value-based (e.g., Q-learning) and policy-based (e.g., Monte
Carlo policy gradient and deterministic policy gradient). The
actor-critic (AC) framework combines the advantages of both
value-based and policy-based approaches. AC consists of
two components, i.e., actor and critic, who uses a value-
based critic to improve updates to the actor (or policy). T.
Zhang et al. [87] employed AC to solve the problem of
joint beamwidth management and resource (transmit power,
channel, and bandwidth) allocation in a mmWave backhaul
heterogeneous network with hybrid energy supply aiming to
maximize long-term cost efﬁciency. They ﬁrst converted the
discrete variables in the action space as continuous ones to
get a continuous state-action space, and then adopted DNN as
function approximator for the AC network. There were two
critic DNNs in their algorithm to evaluate the given policies.
One was an extrinsic critic DNN who used direct experience
sampled from the environment to generate external advantage
values, and the other was an intrinsic critic DNN that used
exploration rewards to calculate internal advantage values. In
intelligent beam management, one main AC RL algorithm
to train deep RL (DRL) agent is deep deterministic policy
gradient (DDPG), who works on continuous action space. In
[88], V. Raj et al. explored a blind beam alignment method
based on the RF ﬁngerprints of users in a multi-BS multi-
user scenario, and modeled the problem of BS selection and
beam direction prediction as an MDP to improve the effective
SINR experienced by the users. For handling the action space
that mixes discrete (BS selection) and continuous (selection
of beam alignment angles) actions, they proposed a new
neural function approximator structure based on DDPG. The
difference between their proposed method and vanilla DDPG
is that the agent based on the proposed method has a user
sub-net augmented actor-network. In [90], D. Zhang et al.
investigated the beam tracking problem for a time-varying
mmWave multiple-input single-output (MISO) channel when
the AoD transition function is unknown to the transmitter, i.e.,
model-free scenario, and rephrased the problem as a POMDP
problem, where the transmit training beams in one beam
tracking period was deﬁned as the action in that period. To
handle such a continuous and high-dimensional action space,
they resorted to DDPG to gain an efﬁcient training beam
sequence design policy.
The above rich achievements indicate that it is feasible
to transform the dynamic beam management problems into
MDPs or POMDPs and solve them through various DRL al-
gorithms. Generally, it is difﬁcult to capture the changes of the
true environment perfectly, exploiting the beam dynamics via
POMDP is more practical. Therefore, towards 6G mmWave
and THz communications, we should probably focus more on
developing beam management scheme based on a well-deﬁned
POMDP framework, and using the DRL algorithms with good
15
adaptability to design an approximately optimal policy for the
POMDP.
Collaborative Training. AI/DL techniques enable auto-
mated analysis of the vast amount of data generated in wireless
networks and subsequent optimization of highly dynamic and
complex networks. However, the data collection and transmis-
sion not only entail heavy communication overhead, but also
raise serious concerns about privacy breaches. An intuitive way
to counteract these issues would be to train and inference
directly at the network edges, such as BSs, roadside units
(RSUs), and devices, using locally generated real-time data. As
each edge may hold only a small training dataset, collaborative
training and inference is a potential way to improve model
accuracy and performance generalization [16], [117]–[119].
FL and split learning are the current widely noticed distributed
collaborative AI approaches for enhanced wireless networks.
When training data is lacking, another promising solution is
to introduce TL to improve the training efﬁciency through
“knowledge transfer”, which can actually be seen as a special
type of collaboration between multiple agents or tasks. In
addition to speciﬁc parallelism such as FL, there are several
other attempts at collaborative training in the literature, which
also involve parallel execution of multiple agents, collectively
referred to as parallel learning in this paper. Next, we will
elaborate on the current contributions to beam management
based on various collaborative training frameworks.
• Federated Learning. Given the ever-increasing attention
on data privacy at edge, FL [120], which is a distributed col-
laborative AI paradigm that trains a shared global model with
locally stored data, is emerged. It has been applied to many
scenarios, such as IoT networks [121]. References [23], [91]–
[98] studied how to minimize the computing delay and energy
consumption of AI model for beam management through FL,
as well as how to improve the learning speed. Two typical FL
structures have been investigated in them, namely centralized
FL and decentralized FL, the only difference between the two
is the presence or absence of a central server.
Till now, centralized FL, which contains a central server and
a set of clients to perform an FL model, is the most popular
FL architecture used in beam management, as shown in Fig. 6.
In our previous work [23], a dynamic beam conﬁguration
algorithm was proposed to improve beam utilization in a
two-tier heterogeneous ultra-dense mmWave system by pe-
riodically sensing instantaneous user distributions. The beam
management problem was formulated as an MDP with a large
state-action space, which was solved using federated DDQN.
Speciﬁcally, at the beginning of each round, the macro BS
sent the current state of the global model to mmWave BSs.
After that, each mmWave BS ﬁrst performed a data cleaning
technique to choose the users for participating in local training
to ensure the quality and diversity of training data, and then
separately trained its local beam conﬁguration model based on
the location information of the participants within its coverage
range. Subsequently, the local updates were sent to the macro
BS, who then applied these updates to its global state via
FederatedAveraging (or FedAvg) [122]. The process repeated.
The proposed algorithm has greater advantages in privacy
protection than traditional centralized DRL algorithms, due
to the data cleaning and non-raw-data aggregation. In [91],
A. M. Elbir et al. introduced FL for hybrid beamforming
in mmWave MU-MIMO systems, where a CNN architecture
was exploited for the model training. Each user computed its
gradient information using its own available training data (a
pair of the channel matrix and the corresponding beamformer
index), then sent it to the BS. The BS collected the gradient
data to train the CNN that outputs the analog beamform-
ers. M. B. Mashhadi et al. [92] focused on LiDAR-aided
beam selection for Vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) mmWave
communication systems, in which connected vehicles trained
a shared NN on their location and locally available LiDAR
data by employing FedAvg, and the collaborative training was
orchestrated by the BS. P.-C. Hsu et al. [95] presented a
FL-based beam search scheme for THz communications to
optimize the network throughput with limited CSI. All the BSs
conducted a DDPG to obtain their THz beamforming policies
and were controlled by a edge server to exchange the training
models with hidden information thereby mitigating inter-cell
interference. We observe that a separated communication-and-
computation pattern is adopted for the model aggregation
procedure in centralized FL. Such pattern could result in a
sharp rise in the consumption of wireless resources (e.g.,
the limited communication bandwidth), which becomes one
of the key bottlenecks in deploying FL in the real world.
As an alternative, by exploiting the waveform superposition
property, over-the-air computation (AirComp) has recently
been integrated into FL to quickly aggregate local models so
as to improve the communication efﬁciency [94], [98], [123].
These above efforts yield the global model by aggregating
updated information at a central sever, improving diagnostic
accuracy, while keeping training data secure and private.
When the communication with the server is not available or
the network topology is highly scalable, decentralized FL,
which is an FL architecture that has no central sever involved
in coordinating the training process, can be employed to
guarantee both the privacy preservation and communication
efﬁciency. Unlike centralized FL, to perform AI collaborative
training, clients in decentralized FL are connected together in
a peer-to-peer manner. Y. Xiao et al. [93] studied noise-robust
beamforming design in UAV communications by adopting
extreme learning machine in a decentralized FL framework,
by which a time-varying undirected topology corresponding
to the dynamic multi-agent system was investigated. With
its decentralized nature, decentralized FL scheme provides
better privacy protection and lower communication cost for
large-scale collaborative tasks than traditional centralized FL
approaches.
The usefulness of FL opens new opportunities for mmWave
and THz beam management. However, to realize existing work
on FL in reality, the joint security, privacy, and incentive
concerns for clients should be further studied and resolved.
It is still an open and vital issue to secure the collaborative
training while motivating the high-quality local model sharing
in highly dynamic scenarios.
• Split Learning. Split learning [117], as the name suggests,
splits an AI model between the edge/cloud server and edge
clients. Each edge node trains only a portion of the full
16
Central Server
Client
Local dataset
Local model 
training
Optimal beam
Model aggregation
Model parameter upload
Global model download
Client
Client
mmWave/THz 
channel 
measurements
Side information 
(Location, Sub-6 GHz 
CSI, Sensing, etc.)
1
3
4
2
Clients
Central Server
Local model 
training
1
2
Model 
aggregation
3
4
...
Fig. 6. General architecture and communication process of centralized FL-based beam management.
model. This model splitting architecture enables a higher level
of privacy and a better tradeoff between communication and
computation. It is thus particularly suitable for large-sized
DL. While FL helps mitigate data privacy concerns, most
existing FL algorithms rely on that each client has sufﬁcient
storage and computing resources to locally update AI models,
especially DNNs. Compared to FL, split DL provides a ﬂexible
way to train a DNN even under small memory and battery-
limited clients (e.g. for mobile/IoT devices). In [99], M. Tian et
al. proposed a LiDAR and position-aided mmWave V2I beam
selection method based on an improved split learning, where
vehicles and a server jointly trained an NN in a private way to
ﬁnd the optimal beam pair, improving the probability of cor-
rect prediction while preserving user privacy. In the method,
the input of the NN was a 2D matrix containing LiDAR and
position information, and the output was the predicted top-k
beam pairs. During the training, the communication between
the vehicles and the server was forwarded by a roadside BS.
This work is an exploration of applying split learning to the
beam selection task in mmWave V2I communications and
presents a new option for AI-empowered beam management
that requires both user information and privacy protection.
As opposed to FL that periodically exchanges model up-
dates, split learning requires to exchange instantaneous model
updates in forward and backward propagations [124]. In
consequence, while effective in terms of accuracy and pri-
vacy, the communication efﬁciency of split learning in beam
management is still questionable. Instead of directly applied,
split learning may need to be improved according to actual
beam management scenarios to be more effective, have better
generalization ability, or be more robust to non-independent
and identically distributed (non-IID) data. Furthermore, the
communication cost of split DL-based beam management
depends on the architecture of the trained NN and how to cut
its layers, calling for more investigation on NN architecture
design and layer cutting.
• Transfer Learning. Usually, a lot of data is needed to
train an AI model from scratch but access to that data is not
always available. This is where TL [125] comes in handy. The
general idea is to reuse the knowledge of a pre-trained model
from one domain, usually with a large dataset, on a new task in
another domain that doesn’t have much data. In terms of beam
management, [100]–[102] proposed beam selection algorithms
based on TL. Speciﬁcally, In [100], H. Chen et al. developed
a parallel DNN with TL to speed up the beam search process
of a mmWave multi-connection system, where the spatial
correlation between sub-6 GHz and mmWave frequency band
was exploited to map the sub-6 GHz channel information to
the mmWave beam index. The two DNNs in the parallel DNN
structure shared the common input, i.e., the sub-6 GHz channel
information from the user to two BSs. They ﬁrst trained one
of the DNNs to output the best beam index of one BS, and
then transferred the learned features to the other DNN for
predicting the beam of the other BS. Clearly, TL was used to
tackle the same task here, rather than a “different” but related
task, in order to boost the system performance in reducing
the training complexity. The major bottleneck of using DNNs
in location-aided beam alignment procedure is the need for
large datasets to tune their trainable parameters. S. Rezaie et
al. [101] showed that TL could be leveraged to signiﬁcantly
reduce the training data requirements of DNNs in performing
location/orientation-aware mmWave beam alignment. In [102],
H. Zarini et al. focused on the problems of beamspace channel
tracking and analog beam selection in a hybrid analog-digital
THz beamspace massive MIMO system. First, a time-series-
based DL approach was proposed to track and predict the
beamspace channel over the sequences of time. Relying on
the predicted beamspace channel, an analog beam selection
strategy was presented to be learned as a classiﬁcation task
by ﬁne-tuning an off-the-shelf pre-trained GoogleNet classiﬁer
based on TL. That is, the ﬁne-tuned GoogleNet learned analog
beam selection at the transceivers based on the beamspace
channel feature space, while its internal weights, biases, and
other parameters remained basically unchanged.
Due to its applicability across domains and tasks, the TL
technique can reduce the time and cost related to collect-
17
ing measurement data, thus promoting the use of NNs in
practical beam management. It is worth mentioning that the
transferred knowledge can only bring a positive impact on
new domains/tasks when it has strong commonalities with the
source domain/task.
• Parallel Learning. We use the term parallel learning due to
its objective, which is parallelizing the computation of model
updates across multiple learning processes. For instance, A.
V. Clemente [126] proposed a parallelization framework for
DRL and demonstrated with an advantage AC algorithm on a
graphics processing unit. In the framework, a set of actors can
be trained synchronously on a single machine. Experiences
was sampled from the distribution currently being observed
from the environment, replacing sampling uniformly from
previous experience. It thus can be motivated as an online
experience memory. The proposed parallel framework reduces
training time while maintaining state-of-the-art performance.
Similarly, N. Van Huynh et al. [103] developed a paral-
lel Q-learning framework for beam association/handover in
mmWave vehicular networks under high mobility. In their
design, the vehicles in the coverage of a BS acted as active
learners to help the system simultaneously collect data, based
on what the BS can quickly learn the environment information.
At each decision epoch and given a current state (i.e., the
received signal strength indicator and the connected beam),
each vehicle chose to connect the beam sent by the BS and
observed the data rate of the connected beam as well as the
next state. The observations were then sent to the BS to
update a global Q-table. The vehicles learned independently
of each other, but shared the same global Q-table. As such,
the proposed parallel Q-learning algorithm converges to the
optimal policy much faster than the conventional Q-learning.
There are several other beam management approaches that
utilize parallel learning. In [104], W. Lei et al. investigated the
problem of joint beam training and data transmission control
for mmWave communications. The considered problem was
formulated as an MDP, and then solved via a parallel rollout
method, in which multiple baseline policies were adopted
simultaneously for computation. In [105], H. Hojatian et al.
designed two local-DNN parallel architectures to perform
decentralized hybrid beamforming cooperatively for a cell-free
massive MIMO network, where the local DNNs were jointly
trained during the training phase, and in the evaluation phase
each AP had a local copy of a portion of the DNN. Parallel and
distributed learning architectures have motivated innovative
modiﬁcations to existing RL algorithms to efﬁciently make
use of parallel execution.
C. Beam Management for ISAC Systems
Early contributions for mmWave/THz beam management
are generally based on the communication-only protocols.
However, a good performance needs high training overhead
to achieve. In highly mobile applications (e.g., V2X and
drone), the beam alignment schemes should be able to predict
the beam directions in order to meet the critical latency
requirements, as the beam training results may soon be-
come outdated. Toward this goal, side information (e.g., the
transmitter/receiver locations and the geometry/characteristics
of surrounding environment) obtained through sensing has
recently been introduced into wireless communication sys-
tems to reduce the beam training overhead and eliminate the
feedback links. Research efforts that toward ISAC systems
are well underway in both academia and industries. Broadly,
the existing research on ISAC beam management is based
on four types of sensing technologies, namely, radar sensing,
communication signal sensing, C&S hybrid signal sensing, and
hiring dedicated sensors, as shown in Table VI. Some typical
usage scenarios are shown in Fig. 7. Next, we will make a
speciﬁc analysis and comparison.
Radar Sensing. In the era of 6G, in addition to wire-
less communications, environmental awareness is also crucial.
With the usage of high frequency (i.e., mmWave/THz), radar
sensing function is expected to be realized in 6G wireless com-
munication networks. Further, in order to unlock the potential
for mmWave/THz in future mobile communication systems,
some researchers are trying to use side information derived
from radar functionality to assist in conﬁguring mmWave/THz
communication links [127]–[132].
For instance, beam alignment in a V2I mmWave commu-
nication scenario is considered by N. González-Prelcic et al.
[127], where a dedicated radar sensor is mounted on the BS
to aid the communication. The key idea is to design the
precoders and combiners on the vehicle and the infrastructure
sides by using the covariance estimates obtained at the radar
band as an estimation of the covariance of the communication
signal in another frequency band. While reducing the beam
training overhead, such a scheme makes the beam alignment
more precise, but at the cost of extra hardware. A. Ali et al.
[128] used the spatial covariance of a passive radar at the
RSU to help establish the mmWave V2I communication link,
where the radar and communication operate at different fre-
quencies. The proposed solution relied on classical calibration
techniques for the radar and communication systems, which
may be expensive and hard to implement in reality. In [129],
MIMO radar deployed on the RSU is used to measure the
azimuth information of moving vehicles to assist in uplink
channel estimation in V2X scenarios. The RSU antenna array
is split into two modules: one for MIMO radar and the other
for uplink wireless communications. For a cellular-connected
UAV network, focusing on the backhaul transmission from
UAV to the ground BS, B. Chang et al. [130] used radar
sensing to track UAV for beam tracking and motion control
of UAV, where BS can work as a sensing radar to monitor
the real-time state of UAV with constant periodical time. In
[132], U. Demirhan et al. developed a radar-aided beam pre-
diction algorithm and evaluated its performance using a real-
world dataset in a realistic vehicular communication scenario,
where the BS adopts a frequency-modulated continuous wave
radar to provide observations of the moving objects in the
environment. The above studies have made good attempts in
radar-assisted beam management for mmWave/THz mobile
communications, proving that the sensing information can
guide the beam prediction well and reduce the beam training
overhead signiﬁcantly.
It is worth mentioning that conventional approaches in ISAC
18
Fig. 7. Typical use cases of ISAC systems with (a) radar sensing, (b) communication signal sensing, (c) hybrid signal sensing, and (d) dedicated sensors.
context mainly focuses on single-beam systems, which limits
the sensing direction to the same as that of the communication.
Directed against this problem, several recent work has raised
the idea of conducting multi-beam design [131], [160], [161],
where the system integrates separate simultaneous beams for
C&S functionalities by considering antenna arrays with multi-
ple elements. L. Yan et al. [131] designed a joint C&S wireless
network architecture for high-speed railways, where the re-
mote radio units operating at mmWave bands point two beams
at trains for communications and at the target areas for sensing,
respectively. In the design, the sensing and communication
beams are mutually orthogonal in the spatial domain, but share
the same antenna array. To mitigate inter-beam interference,
the authors proposed a beam management scheme based on
DRL, in which the beamwidth and inter-beam spacings are
adaptively adjusted according to the dynamic wireless envi-
ronment. In [160], a multi-beam framework with two analog
antenna arrays is presented by J. A. Zhang et al. to simulta-
neously support C&S. Then a beamforming design approach
considering different requirements is proposed, in which stable
and high-gain beams for communication and direction-varying
beams for environment sensing. Similarly, the multi-beam
technique is applied in [161]. The proposed beamforming
approach jointly optimizes the beamforming weights of the
transmitter and receiver to maximize the sensing performance
and mitigate the possible interference from the communication
beam, while also ensuring the target beamforming gain for the
communication link. It is demonstrated that using the multi-
beam technology can signiﬁcantly reduce leakage and clutter
signals. Nevertheless, multi-beam techniques are investigated
for full-duplex ISAC systems that are very challenging to
implement, particularly for MIMO systems. The main reason
is that in a MIMO system, a large number of leakage signals
between the transmitter and receiver antennas need to be dealt
with simultaneously.
Although the systems of radar sensing and communications
may be co-located or even physically integrated, they transmit
two different signals that may overlap in the time domain
and/or frequency domain. So they need to operate coopera-
tively to minimize interference with each other.
Communication Signal Sensing. Conventionally, radio sig-
nals are widely used for data transmissions in a wireless com-
munication network. Recently, applying the communication
signals to sense the environment in which they propagate
has become an interesting topic. The IEEE and 3GPP have
put substantial effort into the development of ISAC-related
speciﬁcations.
• Wi-Fi Sensing. Today, Wi-Fi is ubiquitous and widely
used in almost all public and private spaces to provide plug-
and-play Internet connection. Wi-Fi devices, such as smart-
phones, tablets, personal computers, televisions, sensors for
smart homes, placed in extremely dense and heterogeneous
concentration create an excellent opportunity to continuously
“draw” the surrounding environment using Wi-Fi signals as
sensing waveforms.
The IEEE 802.11 working group has formed a new Task
Group (TGbf), namely 802.11bf, to develop a new amendment
that deﬁnes modiﬁcations to the IEEE 802.11 MAC and to the
19
TABLE VI
SUMMARY OF THE LITERATURE ON BEAM MANAGEMENT MECHANISMS FOR ISAC SYSTEMS.
Techniques
Ref.
Year
Frequency
Scenarios
Sensing Source
Sensing Information
Focus
Radar
[127]
2016
mmWave
V2I
BS
Covariance estimates from
radar signals
Beam alignment
[128]
2020
mmWave
V2I
RSU and vehicle
Radar signals’ spatial covariance
Beam training
[129]
2021
mmWave
MU-MIMO V2X
RSU
Azimuth information of vehicles
Beamforming
[130]
2022
mmWave/THz
Cellular connected UAV
BS
UAV state
Beam alignment
for backhaul
[131]
2022
mmWave
Dual-band communications
for high-speed railways
Remote radio units
SINR
Beam management
[132]
2022
mmWave
BS serves a mobile user
BS
User’s range, angles, and velocity
Beam prediction
Commu.
[133]
2022
Sub-7 GHz
mmWave
WLANs (Wi-Fi)
Wi-Fi devices
Channel measurement for IEEE 802.11ad/ay,
range-Doppler-angular map (R-D-A map),
target-related parameters
Wi-Fi sensing
[134]
2022
mmWave/THz
SSB sensing based ISAC
BS
SSB measurement report
Beam alignment
[135]
2022
THz
SSB-RS sensing based ISAC
BS
SSB measurement report,
user speed
Blockage detection,
User tracking
Hybrid
[136]
2020
mmWave
ISAC V2I
RSU
Vehicle’s angle, distance and velocity
Beam tracking
[137]
2021
mmWave
ISAC V2I
RSU
Vehicle’s range, speed, angle, path loss
Beam tracking
[138]
2021
mmWave
ISAC V2I
RSU and vehicle
AoD and distance at station,
AoA and velocity from vehicle
Beam tracking
[139]
2022
mmWave
SS-OTFS-enabled ISAC
BS
AoA, delay and Doppler shifts
Beam tracking,
AoA estimation
[140]
2022
mmWave
ISAC V2I
RSU
Communication receiver’s
angle, distance and velocity
Beam tracking
[141]
2022
mmWave
ISAC V2I
RSU
System noise,
the distance and velocity of vehicle
Beam tracking
Dedicated
Sensors
[142]
2018
mmWave
Motion beam misalignment
Sensors in mobile device
UE movement, rotation deviation
Beam alignment
[143]
2019
mmWave
V2I
LiDAR on vehicle
LiDAR point cloud
Beam selection
[144]
2020
mmWave
BS serves a single mobile user
Camera
Point clouds of buildings
Beam selection
[145]
2020
mmWave
Sub-6GHz and mmWave
dual-band system
Camera on BS
RGB images
Beam and blockage
prediction
[146]
2021
mmWave
Downlink massive MIMO
Environment-sensing nodes
Channel knowledge map,
user location
Beam alignment
[147]
2021
mmWave
BS serves a moving user
Camera
Features extracted from images
Beam tracking
[148]
2021
mmWave
Internet of Vehicles
Cameras on BS
RGB images
Beam tracking
[149]
2021
mmWave/THz
BS serves mobile users
Camera on BS
RGB images
Blockage prediction
[150]
2022
mmWave
Camera sensing enabled testbed
Camera at the transmitter
Image features of receiver’s
phased array antenna
3D beam tracking
[151]
2022
mmWave
Connected automated vehicles
Onboard camera
Vehicles’ speed and acceleration
by analyzing the image frames
Beam tracking
[152]
2022
mmWave
BS serves a group of users
Satellite image
Pixel characteristic-based feature
BS beam management
[153]
2022
mmWave
BS serves a mobile user
Camera on BS
RGB images
Beam prediction
[154]
2022
mmWave
BS serves a mobile user
Camera on BS
RGB images
Beam tracking
[155]
2022
mmWave//THz
BS serves a ﬂying drone
Camera on BS
RGB images
Beam prediction
[156]
2022
mmWave
V2I
LiDAR on vehicle
LiDAR point cloud
Beam selection
[157]
2022
mmWave
Multiuser MISO
Camera on BS
RGB images and the ﬁeld of view
Beam selection
[158]
2023
mmWave
V2I
LiDAR on vehicle
3D point cloud
Beam selection
[159]
2023
mmWave
V2I
LiDAR on BS
LiDAR point cloud
Beam tracking
DMG and EDMG PHYs to support WLAN/Wi-Fi sensing3 in
all spectrum bands, including license-exempt frequency bands
(sub-7 GHz) as well as its mmWave counterpart (above 45
GHz). In January 2023, TGbf completed a major milestone
with the release of IEEE 802.11bf draft D1.0 [162], which
speciﬁes the necessary protocols to enable Wi-Fi sensing.
IEEE 802.11bf is the world’s ﬁrst international standard for
ISAC, and its standardization is still ongoing at the time
of writing this survey. In [133], R. Du et al. provided a
comprehensive overview on the efforts of TGbf through July
2022, including the new use cases, WLAN sensing procedure,
candidate technical features, and evaluation methodology.
IEEE 802.11bf reuses existing Wi-Fi waveforms and chan-
nels deﬁned by earlier IEEE 802.11 standards to support Wi-
Fi sensing. It allows recognition of large motions (e.g., whole
body motion) using the sub-7 GHz band, and subtle motions
(e.g., ﬁnger movements or head swing) using the mmWave
band to provide higher resolution and improved recognition
accuracy. In particular, sensing measurements in the mmWave
band, denoted as DMG sensing procedure, are built on the
3Because of its simplicity, reliability and ﬂexibility, Wi-Fi has gradually
become a synonym for WLAN. In the 802.11 standard group, “Wi-Fi sensing”
can be regarded as the equivalent term of “WLAN sensing”. The two can be
used interchangeably.
 Sensing 
Tx and Rx
 Specific PPDU
backscatter
 DMG Sensing Session Setup
 DMG Sensing Measurement Setup
 DMG Sensing Measurement Setup Termination
 DMG Sensing Session Termination 
 Sensing 
Initiator
 Sensing 
Responder
 DMG Sensing Instance 
DMG Sensing Procedure
Exchange DMG sensing capabilities
 Exchange and agree on operational attributes 
 DMG Sensing Burst 
 (Schedule DMG sensing instances)
 DMG Sensing Instance 
 DMG Sensing Instance 
Optional
initiation
Mandatory 
sounding
Optional
 reporting
Terminate the measurement setup
 Explicit
 Implicit
Terminate the sensing session
DMG Sensing Types
 Monostatic
Target
 Bistatic
Sensing Tx
Sensing Rx
 Coordinated monostatic
 Coordinated bistatic
 Multistatic
 Passive
Fig. 8. Overview of the DMG sensing procedure and DMG sensing types.
standards of IEEE 802.11ad and 802.11ay, which deﬁne DMG
and EDMG Wi-Fi communications in the 60 GHz band.
Compared with sub-7 GHz sensing, DMG sensing is the focus
of this paper. As shown in Fig. 8, the general DMG sensing
20
procedure entails one or more of the following.
✓DMG sensing session setup. This phase establishes a
sensing session, where sensing-capable STAs can dis-
cover each other and exchange the DMG sensing-related
capabilities, including the supported sensing types (details
are given later) and the roles the STA may assume for
each of the supported DMG sensing types.
✓DMG sensing measurement setup. This process allows a
sensing initiator and a sensing responder to exchange and
agree on the operational attributes associated with DMG
sensing bursts and DMG sensing instances.
✓DMG sensing burst. A DMG sensing burst is made of a
set of scheduled DMG sensing instances, which is the
effective time period for measurements.
✓DMG sensing instance. This is a process of actually
performing sensing measurements, which includes an
optional initiation phase, a mandatory sounding phase,
and an optional reporting phase. In 802.11 context, PHY
protocol data units (PPDUs) are used for sensing mea-
surements during the sounding phase, and which PPDU
to use depends on the DMG sensing type.
✓DMG sensing measurement setup termination. This ex-
plicitly or implicitly terminates an established DMG
sensing measurement setup and releases the allocated
resources.
✓DMG sensing session termination. This terminates the
DMG sensing session established between STAs.
Depending on the number of STAs involved in a sensing
procedure as well as the roles of each STA, DMG sensing
types include monostatic, bistatic, multistatic, monostatic sens-
ing with coordination, bistatic sensing with coordination, and
passive sensing. To be speciﬁc, monostatic sensing involves
a single STA, i.e., the sensing transmitter and receiver are
the same STA. When the sensing transmitter and receiver are
two distinct STAs, the sensing type is said to be bistatic.
Further, when the sensing transmitter and more than one
sensing receivers are distinct STAs, it is multistatic sensing.
Coordinated monostatic/bistatic sensing extends the monos-
tatic/bistatic sensing type. In coordinated monostatic sensing,
the transmissions by one or more devices that perform mono-
static sensing are coordinated by a sensing initiator (e.g., AP).
Similarly, in coordinated bistatic sensing, multiple sensing re-
sponders are also coordinated by one sensing initiator. Lastly,
if a STA conducts DMG sensing using the received PPDUs
(e.g., DMG beacon frames, sector sweep frames) from other
STAs that are not necessarily intended for sensing, it is called
passive sensing.
Prior to the DMG sensing procedure, the beamforming
training between the sensing initiator and responder(s) is
assumed to be completed in advance. IEEE 802.11bf attempts
to reuse the existing (E)DMG protocols as much as possible,
making only necessary changes to accommodate sensing.
WLAN/Wi-Fi sensing is receiving increasing attention due
to the great potential opportunities it creates in applications
such as healthcare, home security, enterprise and building au-
tomation/management. Up to now, outstanding achievements
have been made in using Wi-Fi signals to enhance sensing,
but the sensing results have not been fed back to improve
communication performance.
• 5G NR Sensing. In 3GPP NR standards, various communi-
cation signals provided speciﬁcally for channel estimation can
be used as candidate sensing signals [17], [163], [164], such
as demodulation reference signal (DMRS) for both uplink and
downlink, sounding reference signal (SRS) for uplink, syn-
chronization signal block (SSB), CSI-reference signal (CSI-
RS) and positioning reference signal (PRS) for downlink. To
date, although many work states the feasibility of using the
standard signals deﬁned in 5G NR for sensing and then for
beam prediction and tracking, only a few work has achieved
practical results. Typically, W. Chen et al. proposed two beam
alignment approaches exploiting the SSBs and RSs [134],
[135], where the ISAC THz/mmWave network is modelled
based on the stochastic geometry. The ﬁrst [134] is to use SSB
for sensing to perceive the blockage and track users, providing
timely assistance for beam/cell switches. The SSB sequences
covering all directions are periodically transmitted with time
multiplexing, which is called an SSB burst. Meanwhile, the
authors designed an SSB time-frequency pattern to minimize
beam misalignment under given limited resource, which is
independent of nodes density and mobility. On this basis, a
joint SSB and RS based sensing scheme is put forward in
[135], in which the SSB is used for blockage detection and
the RS is used for user tracking. Among various standard
control signals, the advantages of using SSB and RS to assist
beam alignment are as follows. (1) Designed for beam syn-
chronization, the periodical SSBs can cover all directions, thus
realizing the omni-directional blockage detection. Meanwhile,
SSBs only occupies a small amount of resources in time
and frequency domain and are less frequent, which reduces
detection overhead and computational complexity. (2) The
RSs, e.g., DMRSs, are user speciﬁc and are always transmitted
with data payload, which makes them able to provide real-
time positioning information and suitable for user tracking.
(3) As pilot signals, SSBs are orthogonal over smaller spatial
layers, and RSs are typically orthogonal over time and have
frequency and spatial domains for different users, which lead
to improved sensing performance [163]. It is still an open topic
to explore the design of other speciﬁc communication signal-
based sensing aided beam management schemes. The above
work is a good example for this.
C&S Hybrid Signal Sensing. In order to achieve ultra-
high throughput requirements, it is essential to make future
wireless communication networks coexist harmoniously with
radar systems. One of the approaches is that radar sensing
is relatively independent of communication in the system,
and to design effective interference management algorithms
to maintain both C&S functions by suppressing mutual in-
terference. Another way is to transmit a well-designed signal
waveform to achieve the purpose of simultaneous radar sensing
and communications. In this survey, signals transmitted in
21
such waveform are referred to as C&S hybrid signals4. The
ISAC systems applying C&S hybrid signals have been getting
a lot of attention lately, mainly because that the channel
characteristics of both radar sensing and mmWave commu-
nications are naturally similar which can be exploited, as a
large share of mmWave spectrum resources has been pre-
liminarily allocated to radar systems (e.g., automotive radars
operate in 76-81 GHz frequency band). It is advisable to
use the channel information obtained from radar sensing to
promote effective communication design. In [165], Z. Wei
et al. systematically reviewed the literature on C&S hybrid
signals from the perspective of 5G-Advanced and 6G mobile
communication systems, including C&S hybrid signal design,
signal processing and signal optimization.
By exploiting the radar functionality of ISAC system with
C&S hybrid signals, the communication beam tracking over-
heads can be drastically reduced [136]–[141]. Most work
investigates radar-assisted predictive beam tracking for V2I
communications by realizing C&S functionalities at the RSU.
In [136] and [137], F. Liu et al. employed C&S hybrid
signals in the V2I downlink transmissions, where the echo
signals reﬂected by the vehicles are exploited for tracking
and localization. The difference between the two proposed
schemes is that the former uses an extended Kalman ﬁltering
method for tracking and predicting the motion parameters of
vehicles, while the latter uses a message passing algorithm
based on factor graph. Based on these results, the authors
further improved their proposed schemes in [140] and [141].
As in [136], Y. Xu et al. [138] also employed the extended
Kalman ﬁlter to track the vehicle mobility and predict beam
directions, but the cooperative sensing between the vehicle
and the RSU is considered to enhance the beam alignment
performance. In contrast to most of existing work that always
regards the vehicles as passive targets that could only reﬂect
signals transmitted by the RSU, the scheme presented in [138]
investigates an intelligent vehicle which can actively cooperate
with the RSU by sharing its sensing results. Considering
the fact that the paths for radar sensing and communication
are potentially mismatched, i.e., the path with the strongest
echo power for radar sensing may not be the best path for
communication, an ISAC transmission framework based on
spatially-spread orthogonal time frequency space modulation
is proposed in [139]. By utilizing the previous AoA estimates
and radar reﬂection coefﬁcients, the authors designed beam
tracking and AoA estimation algorithms for radar sensing. The
aforementioned results have conﬁrmed that V2I systems can
avoid frequent feedback between the RSU and vehicles with
the aid of the radar functionality built in the RSU, as the
uplink feedback from the vehicles to the RSU is replaced by
the echo signal. In this sense, the channel/beam information
can be extracted from echo signals, and the released uplink
resources for feedback can be used to transmit useful data. As
4In some papers, the radar-communication dual-functional signal is called
ISAC signal. Unlike them, the concept of ISAC in this survey covers a
wide range. In addition to the sensing based on dual-functional signals,
the communication systems integrating radar sensing, sensing based on
communication signals, and sensing based on dedicated sensors are also called
ISAC systems.
a consequence, the predictive beam tracking based on radar
functionality has lower overhead and lower latency than the
conventional feedback-based approaches.
In ISAC enabled V2X networks, the transmit beams of RSU
and the receive beams of vehicles will be aligned with each
other if the estimation and prediction are sufﬁciently accurate.
However, it has to be mentioned that the predictive beam
tracking schemes proposed in the literature would face quite a
lot of critical challenges that hinder practical implementation.
One of the important issues is the strong assumption adopted.
For example, in many existing V2X system models, the vehicle
is assumed to move along a straight road, which is parallel to
the antenna array. This is obviously an ideal scenario. Future
beam prediction needs to be based on a more realistic driving
behavior model.
Hiring Dedicated Sensors. The mmWave/THz communi-
cation systems can leverage the side information obtained from
dedicated sensors, such as camera, LiDAR, and inertial sen-
sors, to reduce the overhead associated with link conﬁguration.
For instance, in [142], J. Bao et al. argued that information
from motion sensors (e.g., gyroscope) in smart devices helps
mitigate beam misalignment. In [146], D. Wu et al. proposed
a training-free beam alignment technique by utilizing the
channel knowledge map (CKM), which is a geolocation-based
database, together with the user location information. The
CKM will be updated when dedicated environment-sensing
nodes monitor a signiﬁcant change in the environment. With
the pixel characteristic-based features of satellite images, Y.
Yao et al. [152] improved user localization accuracy, and then
proposed a beam management approach for the cluster groups
formed by the clustering algorithm based on UK-medoids.
Among various sensor-aided approaches, the research in-
terests in vision/camera-aided beam management are soaring
in recent two years, e.g., [144], [145], [147]–[151], [153]–
[155], [157]. Encouraged by the developed DL on image
processing, vision information extracted from the red-green-
blue (RGB) images taken by the cameras at BS and/or mobile
station (MS) can be utilized to solve fast beam tracking. A
panoramic point cloud from images taken within the cellular
coverage area is built in [144]. This point cloud gives a
view of the 3D scattering environment, which is then input
to a DNN to predict the optimal beams. In [145], BSs
equipped with cameras were proposed to employ computer
vision and DL techniques to predict mmWave blockage and
beam strength. The authors in [147] and [148] investigated
leveraging camera images for better beam prediction, in which
the simulation and evaluation are conducted on a synthetic
dataset, named vision-wireless (ViWi) dataset5. In contrast, A.
Alkhateeb et al. evaluated their vision-aided beam prediction
approaches proposed in [153]–[155] on a real-world dataset,
namely DeepSense 6G6. They also developed a vision-aided
dynamic blockage prediction solution in [149], and tested the
solution on the ViWi framework. A camera-sensing-assisted
joint ofﬂine and online beam tracking algorithm for connected
and automated vehicles is proposed by Q. Zhang et al. [151],
5https://www.viwi-dataset.net/
6https://deepsense6g.net/
22
and the hardware testbed is developed in [150]. Overall, visual
data as side information for beam management is driven by
two key factors, (1) images are ﬁlled with information about
the environment they depict, and (2) computer vision has made
signiﬁcant advances in image understanding with the help of
DL.
To ensure a full view of the target, cameras in the network
must face the direction of the target from a speciﬁc angle.
Additionally, under harsh lighting conditions, the sensing
performance based on vision (camera) will be seriously de-
graded. This motivates us to investigate other alternatives.
Nowadays, high-dimensional sensor information is available
on the vehicle side, thanks to the recent surge in autonomous
driving technology. LiDAR, for example, is commonly used
by autonomous vehicles for high resolution mapping, obstacle
detection and road environment recognition. Prior work has
shown that LiDAR sensory data can be exploited to reduce
beam-selection overhead in V2I networks at no additional cost,
e.g., [92], [96], [99], [143], [156], [158], [159]. Moreover, it
is widely recognized that data-driven methods can effectively
analyze the LiDAR depth map related to mmWave beam
quality and process the LiDAR signals as side information
for beam searching. In [143], the connected vehicle in a V2I
scenario leverages its LiDAR data to predict a set of candidate
beams conditioned on LoS and NLoS state estimates via a
DNN. In [156], a non-local CNN based beam selection scheme
is proposed, where connected vehicles utilize LiDAR mea-
surements along with their location data to reduce the beam
search overhead required to establish a reliable communication
link with a nearby BS. A RNN model that leverages LiDAR
sensory data for beam prediction and tracking is developed in
[159] and evaluated on the DeepSense 6G dataset. In contrast,
[143] and [156] use LiDAR mounted on the vehicles to predict
current beams, while [159] is committed to predict the current
and future beams using the LiDAR data on the BS side.
D. Beam Management for RIS-Enhanced Systems
Signal/channel blockage is considered to be a major issue
hindering the practical application of mmWave/THz commu-
nications. To alleviate it and thus enhance signal coverage, an
attractive paradigm is to deploy RISs properly in the system
to provide effective reﬂection paths. Considering different RIS
deployment modes, the typical application scenarios are shown
in Fig. 9. Due to the limited scattering of mmWave/THz
channels, it is necessary to conduct beam management to fully
reap the passive beamforming gain of RIS. Speciﬁcally, for
the idle users, initial beam training/alignment at the AP/BS
as well as at the RIS is required to establish a high-quality
link before data transmission. Then fast beam tracking is
performed to maintain the links for the connected users. As
beam management for RIS-assisted mmWave/THz systems
requires jointly manage the beams of the two-hop transmis-
sion, AP/BS-RIS and RIS-user, it is much more challenging
than that for conventional systems with one-hop transmission
topology. This subsection discusses and summarizes the major
approaches proposed to address the beam management issue
in RIS-assisted mmWave/THz communication systems. We
classify the existing schemes into three categories, including
methods based on beam sweeping, AI-driven methods, and
sensing-aided methods, which are revealed in Table VII.
Detailed descriptions are as follows.
Beam Sweeping-based Methods. A general beam train-
ing and tracking technique for RIS-assisted mmWave/THz
communications is to perform beam sweeping based on pre-
designed active/passive beamforming codebooks [166]–[173].
Each codebook consists of only a ﬁnite number of beam
directions or patterns. The beam-sweeping-based schemes do
not require complex channel estimation, so they are very
beneﬁcial for large RIS. Note that the method for the AP/BS-
user link cannot be directly applied to the cascaded AP/BS-
RIS-user link since RIS itself cannot generate or receive beams
like AP/BS or user. In the following, we discuss the extension
of conventional beam sweeping techniques in RIS-assisted
systems. Two typical approaches are shown in Fig. 10.
• Exhaustive Search: As is widely used in WLAN/WPAN,
exhaustive beam search [166], [167], [169], [171], [173] is the
most precise and straightforward approach to perform beam
training, in which no prior information is known. For RIS-
assisted mmWave/THz communications, the optimal beam pair
of the direct AP/BS-user link can be estimated by steering
beams as previously mentioned. To acquire the best beam
combinations for the cascaded link, a natural approach is
to exhaustively search all possible |C퐵| · |C푅|2 · |C푈| beam
tuples/triplets, where C퐵, C푅and C푈are the predeﬁned
training codebooks of AP/BS, RIS and user, respectively. For
example, the coodbook corresponding to a set of narrow beams
can be designed by uniformly quantizing the whole space of
interest (e.g., the AoD for AP/BS, the AoA for user, and the
relative reﬂection angle for RIS) [171]. With the codebooks, an
exhaustive-search-based RIS beam training is as follows: The
transmitter (e.g., AP/BS) consecutively sends multiple training
symbols, while the RIS sequentially scans its entire reﬂecting
directions over different training symbols, and the receiver
(e.g., user) needs to scan the entire AoA space for every
combination of transmitting and reﬂecting beam patterns, so
that the optimal beam that achieves the maximum received
signal power/SNR will be found. Although straightforward,
such method is practically prohibitive for large RIS with mas-
sive number of reﬂecting elements, which incurs excessively
high training complexity and time overhead for establishing
high quality links. Therefore, the exhaustive-search-based RIS
beam training methods described in the existing literature are
mainly used to compare their proposed schemes.
• Hierarchical Search: As the exhaustive beam search is
time consuming, hierarchical multi-resolution beam search
[167], [171], [172] has been widely accepted to reduce the
complexity. A hierarchical-search-based approach generally
realizes beam training based on multi-layer codebooks where
a lower-layer codebook consists of wider beams in comparison
with higher-layer codebooks, rather than exhaustively search-
ing over all narrow-beam combinations. The beam sweeping
procedure for each layer is similar to that of the exhaustive
search, except that here we only need to search the range
that is identiﬁed in the earlier stage. That is, the search range
of the latter layer sub-codebook is determined by the optimal
23
(b) Mobile RIS
(a) Fixed RIS
V2V
V2V
Fig. 9. Typical application scenarios of RIS, where (a) ﬁxed RIS deployment and (b) mobile RIS deployment.
codeword searched by the previous layer codebook. Therefore,
the performance of hierarchical search is highly dependent on
training codebook design and the spatial resolution increases
with the number of layers. B. Ning et al. [167] presented a
cooperative beam training scheme that combines partial search
at RIS and ternary-tree hierarchical search at BS and users. In
particular, only a subset of candidate RIS phase shift solutions
needs to be searched, which helps to reduce the complexity.
To realize the ternary-tree search, two codebooks are designed,
namely tree dictionary codebook and phase shift deactivation
codebook. Thanks to low cost and low power consumption,
RIS is more likely to develop into super-scale RIS for future
6G communications to efﬁciently boost the system capacity.
X. Wei et al. [172] points out that the scatters are more likely
to be in the near-ﬁeld region of the super-scale RIS and the far-
ﬁeld codebook [166], [167] mismatches the near-ﬁeld channel
model. The existing far-ﬁeld beam training scheme will cause
severe performance loss in the super-scale RIS assisted near-
ﬁeld communications. To solve this problem, they designed
a hierarchical near-ﬁeld codebook which consists of several
different levels of sub-codebooks determined by different
sampling ranges and sampling steps. Based on the codebook,
the corresponding beam training scheme is further proposed.
• Multi-beam Search: Conventional beam training usually
searches over possible beam directions by a single beam.
The single-beam search is practically challenging for systems
assisted by RIS with large reﬂecting elements that can generate
pencil-like beams, because it requires a large number of beam
directions in the training codebook to cover the space of
interest. To reduce the single-beam training time, multi-beam
training has attracted the attention of some researchers [166],
[170], [171], [173]. For instance, a multi-beam sweeping
method based on grouping-and-extracting was proposed by C.
You et al. [166]. They divided the RIS reﬂecting elements into
multiple sub-arrays and designed their multi-beam codebook
to steer different beam directions simultaneously over time.
Then, the user can detect its optimal RIS beam direction via
simple comparison of the received signal power/SNR. For
simplicity, this work assumes that the AP-RIS link and the
RIS vertical beamforming has aligned, and then only focuses
on the horizontal beam training between the RIS and the
user. Nevertheless, in practice, the information of RIS location
may not be available to the BS, in which case one needs
to perform a joint BS-RIS-user beam training. W. Mei et
al. [170] proposed a more general multi-path beam routing
scheme by exploiting active beam splitting and passive beam
combining techniques. Speciﬁcally, the BS sends the user’s
information signal via multiple orthogonal active beams point-
ing towards different RISs, and then these beamed signals are
subsequently reﬂected by selected RISs via their cooperative
passive beamforming in different paths, and ﬁnally coherently
combined at the user. In addition to the active multi-beam, the
passive multi-beam has also been considered by P. Wang et
al. [171], [173]. That is, they proposed to let both the BS and
the RIS form multiple pencil beams simultaneously and steer
them towards different directions. It is worth mentioning that
whether passive multi-beam training is effective in practice
needs further veriﬁcation, as the inter-beam interference, the
achievable passive beamforming gain, and the codebook size
at RIS may increase the overall training complexity.
• Other Advanced Methods: Instead of exhaustively or
sequentially searching over the combinations of active and
passive beam patterns, several other beam training methods
have been tried to reduce the complexity. For instance, W.
Wang et al. [168] proposed to break down beam training of
multi-RIS assisted mmWave MIMO into two mathematically
equivalent sub-problems. They further perform random beam-
forming and maximum likelihood estimation to jointly esti-
mate AoA and AoD of the dominant path in each sub-problem.
A beam training method with combined ofﬂine and online
distributed beam training is proposed in [169], by exploiting
the (nearly) time-invariant BS-RIS and inter-RIS channels and
the cooperative training among the BS and RISs’ controllers.
In order to provide a zero overhead training procedure for
RIS-assisted single-input multiple-output (SIMO) orthogonal
frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) system, K. Chen-Hu
et al. [184] investigated a differential-data-aided beam training
combined with a codebook, relying on data transmission and
reception based on non-coherent demodulation.
AI-driven Methods. The AI technique is a powerful tech-
nology that has gained signiﬁcant interest in wireless commu-
24
TABLE VII
SUMMARY OF THE LITERATURE ON BEAM MANAGEMENT MECHANISMS FOR RIS-ASSISTED SYSTEMS.
Techniques
Ref.
Year
Frequency
Scenarios
RIS
Conﬁguration
Focus
Performance Metrics
Beam
Sweeping
◦Exhaustive
• Multi-beam
[166]
2020
mmWave
An RIS is deployed between a multi-
antenna AP and a group of single-
antenna users, where the direct AP-
user links are blocked.
Passive
RIS horizontal
beam training
• Beam training overhead
• Beam identiﬁcation accuracy
• Average achievable rate
◦Exhaustive
• Partial
• Hierarchical
[167]
2021
THz
A narrowband downlink multi-user
massive MIMO system, where each
user is served by multiple RISs.
Passive
Beam training for
both the BS-user link
and the reﬂecting link
• Correct detection rate
Random
[168]
2021
mmWave
Multi-RIS-assisted MIMO system
Passive
Joint Beam Training
and Positioning
• Beam misalignment rate
◦Exhaustive
• Distributed
[169]
2021
Null
A multi-antenna BS serves a single-
antenna user via a multi-hop LoS
link formed by distributed RISs.
Passive
Beam training
at the BS and RISs
• Effective channel gain
Multi-beam
[170]
2022
Null
A multi-antenna BS communicates
with a single-antenna user via one or
more RIS reﬂection paths.
Passive
Active and passive
beam selection
• Optimized reﬂection paths
• Received signal power
◦Exhaustive
◦Hierarchical
• Multi-beam
[171]
2022
mmWave
MIMO system aided by a RIS, where
the direct BS-user link is blocked.
Passive
BS-RIS-user
beam training
• Average achievable rate
• Beam training overhead
Hierarchical
[172]
2022
Null
A large-scale RIS is deployed be-
tween a multi-antenna BS and a
single-antenna user, where the direct
BS-user link is blocked.
Passive
Near-ﬁeld
RIS beam training
• Achievable rate
• Beam training overhead
◦Exhaustive
• Multi-beam
[173]
2022
mmWave/
THz
An RIS is deployed between a multi-
antenna BS and a number of single-
antenna users, where all BS-user
links are blocked.
Passive
Active and passive
beam training
• Success rate
• Beamforming gain ratio
AI
Conventional ML
(Genetic algorithm)
[174]
2021
mmWave
A reconﬁgurable meta-surface with
beam-steering capabilities has been
adopted to track the position of a
mobile receiver.
Passive
Beam steering
• Outage probability
• Channel capacity
FCNN
[175]
2021
5.8 GHz
A prototype of wireless communica-
tion using the RIS consisting of 256
meta-material antenna elements.
Passive
Beam alignment
• CDF of positioning error
• CDF of beam angle error
RNN
[176]
2021
THz
A THz drone network in which a
mobile drone is served by a BS and
a ﬂying RIS.
Passive
Beam prediction
• Prediction accuracy
LSTM
[177]
2022
mmWave
An RIS-assisted system in which a
multi-antenna BS serves a single-
antenna user.
Passive
Beam alignment
• Mean square estimation
• Average beamforming gain
DDQN
[178]
2022
mmWave
An RIS-assisted mmWave cellular
network with a set of BSs and users,
where each UE is equipped with a
single omni-directional antenna and
BS utilizes a phased array.
Passive
Blockage prediction
(Beam tracking)
• Prediction accuracy
• Average spectrum efﬁciency
• Handover number
Deep
Residual Network
[179]
2022
mmWave
An large-scale RIS is employed be-
tween a multi-antenna BS and mul-
tiple single-antenna users to assist
communications, the direct links are
blocked.
Passive
Beam training
• Normalizd RIS beam gain
• Effective achievable rate
FL
[180]
2023
Null
A multi-RIS-aided multi-user system
with one multi-antenna BS, and each
user is equipped with single antenna.
Passive
Beamforming
• Spectrum efﬁciency
• Achievable rate
Sensing
Dedicated Sensors
[181]
2022
THz
An
RIS-assisted
THz
multi-user
massvie MIMO system, where the
BS-user link is blocked.
Passive and
integrated with
wideband sensors
RIS-user beam training
• Spectral efﬁciency
• Achievable rate
Dedicated Sensors
[182]
2022
5.4 GHz
A vision-aided RIS prototype sys-
tem, in which the BS and user are
equipped with single antenna and the
LoS path is blocked.
Passive and
attached with a
binocular camera
RIS beam tracking
• SNR variation
Dedicated Sensors
[183]
2022
Null
A standalone RIS is placed to aid
the communication between a multi-
antenna BS and a single-antenna
user, and a blockage exists between
the BS and the user.
Semi-passive
and attached with
cameras
RIS beam selection
• Accuracy/recall performance
• Achievable rate
*Note that the symbol “•” in the “Techniques” column indicates the core scheme proposed in the paper.
nications due to its learning ability and huge search space. AI
may constitute efﬁcient approaches for leveraging the potential
beneﬁts of RIS-empowered smart radio environment. For RIS,
especially for large RIS with massive number of reﬂecting
elements, channel estimation or reﬂection beam training will
face the following challenges. (1) If all RIS elements are pas-
sive, prohibitive training overhead will be incurred. (2) In the
case of fully-digital or analog-digital hybrid RIS architectures,
hardware complexity and power consumption is not feasible
in practice [185]. In this context, RIS combined with AI has
been proposed as a potential solution to improve the coverage
and spectrum efﬁciency for 6G wireless communications.
In recent years, RIS-assisted communication has adapted
different AI techniques, especially ML, for performance en-
hancement. For instance, the joint design of transmit beam-
forming at BS and phase shifting at reﬂecting RIS using DRL
to maximize the sum rate of a multi-user downlink MISO
system was studied by C. Huang et al. [186]. Speciﬁcally,
an algorithm based on DDPG neural network is developed
to solve the optimization problem, in which the joint design
is obtained through trial-and-error interactions with the en-
vironment by observing predeﬁned rewards, in the context
of continuous state and action. In [187], Q. Zhang et al.
proposed a DRL approach to learn the optimal RIS reﬂection
and maximize the rate expectation of the RIS-aided downlink
MISO transmission with imperfect CSI, where an iterative
25
(b) Hierarchical Search
(a) Exhaustive Search
User
BS
controller
User
BS
controller
RIS
RIS
User
BS
controller
RIS
Layer 1
Layer 2
User
BS
controller
RIS
Layer 3
Fig. 10. Typical beam search approaches for RIS-assisted systems, where (a)
exhaustive search and (b) a 3-layer hierarchical search.
learning algorithm based on quantile regression is developed
to model the probability distribution of rate. Compared to the
conventional or traditional model-based approaches, AI-based
technology can help better extract the inherent relationship
between input and output signals and enable more reliable
channel estimation, phase shift conﬁguration and beamform-
ing. M. A. S. Sejan et al. [188] provided a comprehen-
sive overview of the state-of-the-art on ML/DL-based RIS-
enhanced wireless communications, and classiﬁed ML applied
in RIS for phase shift conﬁguration and beamforming into DL,
RL, SL, unsupervised learning, and FL. They concluded that
the AI/ML-based approaches have a comparable performance
Environment
AI model
Beam 
Management 
Policy
action
Replay 
memory
reward
state
mini-batch
RIS
User
BS
RIS controller
Fig. 11. DRL-based beam management in RIS-aided communication system.
to conventional methods while reducing computational com-
plexity.
Back to beam management, in order to alleviate the heavy
overhead of the passive beam alignment in RIS-assisted com-
munications, different AI techniques are recently introduced
for beam tracking under various wireless communication en-
vironments [174]–[179]. A typical DRL approach is shown
in Fig. 11. For instance, C. Rizza et al. [174] proposed a
Genetic algorithm to integrate a reconﬁgurable meta-surface as
computing unit and perform real-time beam steering functions
in a mobile scenario. C. Xiao et al. [175] constructed an
indoor wireless communication prototype for verifying the
passive beamforming using RIS and proposed an architecture
of adaptive beam alignment and indoor positioning by using
DNN. The beam alignment is realized by using the relationship
between an energy array image and the beam direction of the
RIS. To integrate a ﬂying RIS into THz drone communications,
N. Abuzainab et al. [176] considered a RNN solution for
beam prediction and proactive hand-off based on the prior
observations of drone location/beam trajectories. F. Sohrabi et
al. [177] developed an adaptive active and reﬂection beam
alignment strategy to the high-dimensional analog channel
sensing problems by using a LSTM framework. L. Jiao
et al. [178] proposed an RIS-assisted handover scheme by
leveraging DDQN to deal with the frequent mmWave channel
blockages, where the DRL agent manages to reduce the cumu-
lative handover overhead by jointly adjusting beamformers and
RIS phase shifts. W. Liu et al. [179] proposed two DL-based
near-ﬁeld beam training schemes for large-scale RIS-assisted
communication systems, where deep residual networks are
employed to determine the optimal near-ﬁeld RIS codeword.
While AI can improve communication performance for
RIS-assisted systems in different ways, the privacy of user
data has often been ignored in previous work. Against this
background, a privacy-preserving paradigm combining FL
with RIS in the mmWave/THz communication system needs
to be designed. L. Li et al. [189] proposed two FL-based
mmWave wireless communication scenarios. One is RIS-
assisted outdoor mmWave communication, where the user
participating in communication under the FL framework is
regarded as a client/agent that trains a local model, and the
26
controller of RIS is regarded as the central server for local
model aggregation. The second scenario is multi-RIS-assisted
IoT communication, where an AP connected to multiple RISs
is regarded as the central server while each RIS as client.
The former applies FL to train the optimal DNN model of
the mapping between the user channels and the optimal RIS
conﬁguration matrix through distributed learning, so as to
effectively protect the privacy of users while maximizing the
user achievable rate. In the IoT communication, FL is used
to optimize multiple RISs in parallel under the protection of
private CSI, so as to achieve the optimal sum rate of combined
signals, namely the superposition of all RISs’ signals. In
[180], H. Min et al. proposed an unsupervised stratiﬁed FL-
based beamforming optimization approach for heterogeneous
RIS-aided multi-user communication systems, of which the
aim was to maximize the achievable sum rate by jointly
optimizing the active beamforming at BS and the passive phase
shifts at RISs. It allows users to train NNs collaboratively
in an unsupervised manner by exploiting internal correlations
within the observed channel data while avoiding the effects of
heterogeneity of distributed datasets.
Although AI-based beam management for mmWave com-
munications has been studied extensively, there are limited
solutions for RIS-assisted mmWave and THz communication
scenarios. Since RIS beam alignment for mmWave/THz com-
munications usually requires high computational complexity,
the scheme of combining RIS-assisted system with AI is worth
further exploration.
Sensing-aided Methods. In recent years, we have witnessed
a great deal of effort to design solutions that integrate sensing
capabilities into communication systems, i.e., ISAC. More
recently, RIS-assisted ISAC has emerged and are attracting
increasing attention in both academia and industries. A. M.
Elbir et al. [190] investigated the role of RIS in the future
ISAC paradigms. It presents various RIS-assisted radar and
ISAC models that leverage RIS to provide ﬂexibility for
dynamic and accurate beamforming, resulting in advantages
such as improved energy-efﬁciency, spectral efﬁciency, signal
coverage, parameter estimation, and interference suppression.
While there is a rich literature on RIS-assisted wireless
communications, the RIS-assisted ISAC remains relatively
unexamined. By considering a basic MIMO ISAC system
model, S. P. Chepuri et al. [191] showcased that joint sensing
and communications designs are mostly beneﬁcial when the
respective channels are coupled, and that RISs can facilitate
the efﬁcient control of this beneﬁcial coupling. L. Wang et
al. [192] studied the potential of RISs in the OFDM ISAC
system at mmWave bands, where the hybrid beamforming
and RIS phase shifts are jointly designed to guarantee the
functionalities of both communication for the mobile users
and sensing of the targets. J. Zuo et al. [193] proposed
a RIS-NOMA-ISAC system, in which the RIS beampattern
gain for the radar target is adopted as a sensing metric.
The objective is to maximize the minimum beampattern gain
by jointly optimizing active beamforming, power allocation
coefﬁcients and passive beamforming. H. Luo et al. [194]
investigated the joint active and passive beamforming design
for an RIS-assisted ISAC system, with the aim of maximizing
the achievable sum-rate of the communication users, while
satisfying the constraints of beampattern similarity for radar
sensing, the RIS restriction and the transmission power budget.
Z. Zhu et al. [195] focused on an RIS-aided ISAC system
for the multi-user downlink scenario in the mmWave band,
and formulated a sum-rate maximization problem by jointly
optimizing the radar signal covariance matrix, the commu-
nication beamforming vector, and the RIS phase shift. X.
Song et al. [196] studied the joint transmit and reﬂective
beamforming design in an RIS-assisted ISAC system with one
communication user and multiple potential sensing targets at
the NLoS areas of the BS. The objective is to maximize the
RIS minimum beampattern gain towards the desired sensing
angles by jointly optimizing the transmit information and
sensing beamforming at the BS and the reﬂective beamforming
at the RIS. To minimize the total transmit power at the BS
in an RIS-aided radar-communication system, M. Hua et al.
[197] jointly optimized the active beamformers at the BS, i.e.,
communication beamformers and radar beamformers, and the
phase shifts at the RIS, subject to the minimum SINR required
by communication users, the minimum SINR required by the
radar, and the cross-correlation pattern design.
The aforementioned studies indicate that for RIS-assisted
ISAC systems under various settings, both sensing and com-
munications can experience improved performance when the
RIS is properly deployed and designed. In particular, the
beamforming design in RIS-assisted ISAC scenarios needs to
simultaneously consider the mobile users for communications,
the targets for sensing, and the phase conﬁguration of RIS. It
is noteworthy that, to date, the research on beam management
for RIS-assisted ISAC at mmWave and THz bands is still a
gap to be ﬁlled, to the best of our knowledge.
So far, there are only a few attempts made on beam
management based on sensing for RIS-assisted systems. In
[181], the ultra-wideband sensors are integrated into the RIS,
and the user location information obtained by the sensors is
exploited to expedite the channel estimation and beamforming
processes for RIS assisted THz multi-user massvie MIMO
systems. In fact, among various sensing means, computer
vision may be a suitable option for the design of RIS reﬂec-
tion coefﬁcient in RIS-assisted mmWave/THz communication
systems [182], because (1) complex feedback links can be
replaced by cheap cameras while keeping RIS low cost, (2)
camera can effectively and quickly locate users within the
LoS range, and (3) the acquisition of visual information does
not occupy the communication frequency bands, thus saving
spectrum resources. For instance, M. Ouyang et al. [182]
proposed a computer vision-based approach to aid RIS for
dynamic beam tracking, where a binocular camera is used to
obtain visual information, and the object detection and stereo
vision algorithms are used to calculate the user coordinates
with respect to the RIS. With the user coordinates, RIS
quickly identiﬁes the desired reﬂected beam direction and then
adjusts the reﬂection coefﬁcients according to the pre-designed
codebook. Unlike most prior work using fully passive RIS,
S. Jiang et al. [183] investigated the feasibility of enabling
3GPP 5G transparent/standalone RIS operation, where the RIS
is equipped with sparse active antenna elements what is known
27
as the semi-passive RIS architecture. To guide the RIS beam
selection in the proposed standalone RIS operation, the authors
developed a ML framework and a neural network architecture
that leverage the visual data captured by cameras installed at
the RIS to predict the user-sider candidate beam set.
E. Lessons Learned: Summary and Insights
Lesson 1: The increase in data and computing capabilities
fuels the explosion in AI over the past decade. Powered by
advanced AI algorithms, especially CNN, LSTM, MAB, and
DRL (e.g., DQN and AC), AI has achieved unprecedented
success in mmWave and THz beam management. Despite
the simplicity, the beam management schemes based on SL
require a large number of training samples, while collecting
training samples is usually costly, and the samples must be
renewed when the environment changes. In contrast, the RL-
based beam management algorithms acquire the training data
in the form of the learning agent’s experience by interacting
with the environment and observing its response, rather than a
separate collection of data that must be fed to the algorithms.
This greatly reduces the burden on the supervisor in charge
of the process of model training. Therefore, compared to SL,
RL enables more ﬂexible and efﬁcient beam management by
adapting to the user’s behavior and surroundings, which means
being more intelligent. While RL has successfully solved
beam management problems in diverse simulated complex
environments, there are some challenges that make their up-
take difﬁcult in real-world settings, such as RL agent needs
rich experience, delayed rewards, lack of interpretability, etc.
Besides, for application scenarios with large-scale data that
require low latency, efﬁciency, and scalability, or with privacy
sensitive training data, traditional centralized AI frameworks
may be impractical, giving rise to the researches on collab-
orative learning schemes. In particular, the techniques of FL
and split learning are introduced to cope with the issues in
terms of data privacy and communication overhead. TL is
employed to eliminate the need for AI models to be trained
from scratch when the amount of training data is insufﬁcient,
and to improve training efﬁciency. However, these approaches
often degrade the model performance or introduce additional
communication costs. How to balance communication costs,
accuracy, and privacy requires further investigation.
Lesson 2: One important observation for mmWave/THz
beam management is that the beam selection problem highly
relies on the transmitter and/or receiver locations as well as the
geometry/characteristics of the surrounding environment. This
means that knowing some information about the surrounding
environment and transceiver location has the potential to fa-
cilitate beam management in terms of beam training, tracking,
and prediction. An efﬁcient way to gain this awareness is
to use the sensing ability in ISAC systems. In future highly
mobile systems such as V2X, where the network topology
and surroundings are time-varying, radar-type and vision-aided
techniques are envisioned as most promising candidates to
detect and track cars, pedestrians, road lanes and obstacles
in real-time. The radar/vision sensing data is then used to
predict the channel/beam(s) as the user moves. The existing
studies demonstrate convincingly that sensing are beneﬁcial to
improve communication rate and more accurate beam tracking
performance, while using less training overhead. However,
prior work using radar (location), vision (camera), and LiDAR
is mostly limited only to LoS links and hard to cover the NLoS
targets. Furthermore, it is necessary to extend the proposed
strategies to multi-user scenarios. As an example, the accuracy
of radar positioning may decline when there are multiple
targets. In addition, for ISAC systems with communication
signal sensing, reasonable resource allocation in frequency,
time, and spatial domains is the key to balance sensing and
communication performance.
Lesson 3: In order to fully reap the passive beamforming
gain in the RIS-assisted mmWave/THz communication system,
beam management for the two-hop transmission topology is
very necessary but challenging due to RIS cannot generate
and decode beams. In the conventional beam sweeping-based
training methods, the exhaustive beam search inevitably incurs
prohibitively high training overhead; the hierarchical search
can effectively reduce the amount of training overhead, but it
has a major drawback, which is that the use of wide beams
at early search stages may result in low beamforming gains;
the multi-beam search in practice may face challenges such as
increased inter-beam interference, reduced passive beamform-
ing gain and increased codebook size. Due to the ability in
providing fast responses, AI-based algorithms are very suitable
for mobile communications (e.g., V2X), where mobility is
a great issue and needs to perform real-time beam steering.
With the gradual rise of RIS-assisted ISAC, beamforming
design has attracted much attention, but the research on beam
management is still urgent to be ﬁlled for the ISAC systems
at the mmWave and THz bands. In addition to radar and
other sensors, computer vision (cameras) is recently introduced
into the RIS-assisted communication systems to reduce the
beam training overhead and eliminate the requirement for extra
feedback links. Combining RIS-assisted system with AI and/or
ISAC is a promising solution for future beam management that
deserves further exploration. Besides, the standalone (semi-
passive) RIS architecture helps with channel estimation, but
at the cost of increasing costs.
IV. CHALLENGES AND OPEN ISSUES
In order to efﬁciently implement 6G mmWave and THz
communications with the importance of using AI, sensing
(ISAC) and RIS, several potential technical concerns of beam
management are discussed below.
A. AI-Empowered 6G Framework
While AI techniques in wireless networks are already being
discussed in 5G, we anticipate that 6G deployments will
be much denser in terms of number of small BSs/APs and
users, and more heterogeneous in terms of integration of
different technologies and application characteristics, with
stricter performance requirements compared to 5G. This is
calling for deeper research on how AI can enhance 6G. Let’s
next identify some common and speciﬁc characteristics that
are being considered.
28
Collaborative Edge AI. Given the requirements of emerg-
ing 6G, collaborative edge AI is expected to be an indis-
pensable component in 6G. By executing AI models directly
at network edges, edge training and inference can provide
AI services with low latency and high reliability by re-
ducing computing, communication, storage, and engineering
resources. The environment state in most real-world mobility
applications, like trafﬁc scenarios, are partially observable.
Collaborative AI provides an opportunity to combine partial
observations across multiple network edges or tasks to gather
more information. The paradigms of collaborative AI, like
communication or collaboration, can explicitly or implicitly
utilize this opportunity to improve performance. To tame
privacy leakages and adversarial attacks, various collaborative
edge AI models and architectures have been proposed, such
as FL (i.e., an server-client network architecture with data
partitioning among edge devices) and split learning (i.e., an
architecture with model parameters partitioned among edge
servers and edge devices). By leveraging and learning the
joint beam dynamics of multiple users, collaborative edge AI
can help design ﬂexible and low-latency beam management
strategies to adapt to dynamic environmental ﬂuctuations. This
topic is still being explored. The optimal tradeoff between
model efﬁciency and communication overhead is one of the
challenges in implementing collaborative edge AI-based beam
management that must be further studied.
Sensing AI. One function of AI in wireless networks is
to use sensors to sense and collect data from the physical
environments, followed by smart data analytic using AI tech-
niques. This function can be termed as sensing AI that well
supports sensing tasks over wireless networks such as people
and object detection, localization, and motion and activity
recognition. Among them, localization aimed at determining
the geographic coordinates of network nodes and objects is
important for efﬁcient beam management. Some important
works are highlighted with the exploitation of sensing AI for
localization tasks. Typically, a continuous wireless localization
process can be formulated as an MDP, which can then be
derived by applying DRL. By estimating the location of target
users in the complex dynamic networks using sensing AI, fast
beam tracking can be implemented.
Model Generalization. Generalization is a term used to
describe a model’s ability to react to previously unseen,
new data. The optimal beam angle for mmWave and THz
communications highly depends on the propagation environ-
ment. Naturally, it is best for each node (i.e., BS or UE) to
collect its own data for model training, which comprises the
speciﬁc environmental features for optimizing the local model.
Nevertheless, collecting huge amounts of training data imposes
excessive cost or simply impossible. Fortunately, many of
these environmental factors share similar properties (e.g., for
the LOS path), while others such as scatterers vary with
the environment. In these contexts, TL can be adopted for
applying the knowledge extracted from one environment to
another, so that exciting performance can be achieved even
with only a limited training dataset. Up to now, there are only
a few exploratory achievements in introducing TL into beam
management process. As a further emerging technology, meta-
learning [198], or learning to learn, can be adopted for further
enhancing the model’s generalization capability. Its potential in
beam management has not yet been explored. With the ability
to generalize, it would likely be very useful for reducing the
burden of beam management in complex environments.
Life Cycle Management. 3GPP TSG RAN is studying on
AI/ML for NR air interface. One aspect worth exploring in
the AI/ML framework is life cycle management (LCM) [199].
The necessity and general components in AI/ML LCM were
discussed in 3GPP TSG RAN WG1 (RAN1) meetings. In
RAN1#110bis-e meeting, RAN1 made much progress on the
different components of LCM, especially for model selection,
activation, deactivation, switching, fallback, and model mon-
itoring. In RAN1#111 meeting, RAN1 decided to study both
functionality-based and model-ID-based LCM. An AI/ML
functionality refers to beam management, CSI compression,
positioning, etc. In RAN1#112 meeting, RAN1 discussed
common and use case speciﬁc aspects in LCM, including data
collection, model control and model monitoring, model ID,
model identiﬁcation, and model transfer/delivery. Typically,
RAN1 also agreed to study model monitoring at least for the
purposes of model control and model update and elaborated on
how model monitoring interacts with model control for the use
case of CSI compression and beam management. The AI/ML
deployment and LCM process is an exciting journey ﬁlled
with many subtleties and complexities. Despite the preliminary
victories in standardization, LCM in AI/ML-empowered beam
management has yet to be addressed in concrete scenarios,
which is a topic worthy of attention in the future.
B. ISAC-Enabled 6G Framework
ISAC technology can realize blockage detection and user
positioning with the help of sensing, and thus provides in-
structions for fast beam alignment and tracking. Several key
challenges are as follows.
Radar-Type ISAC Implementation. The ISAC systems
integrating radar-type sensing may be divided into the fol-
lowing two categories. (1) Loose integration. C&S functions
are physically integrated in one system, where two sets of
dedicated hardware components and/or two different signal
waveforms overlapped or separated in time, frequency or
spatial domains are used by them. (2) Tight integration. By
sharing the majority of hardware, the C&S functions are
more ﬁrmly integrated and delivered by a common signal
waveform. The ﬁrst ISAC system can be implemented with
simple modiﬁcations to the existing system infrastructure.
The key to enabling the smooth operation of individually
deployed C&S functions is to develop effective interference
management techniques. The second ISAC system reduces the
equipment size, hardware cost and power consumption while
improving the spectral efﬁciency. In such system, ﬂexible and
reconﬁgurable C&S hybrid signals are crucial to improve the
efﬁciency of both communications and radar sensing. To this
end, it is necessary to carry out ISAC signal design (e.g.,
design of waveform, frame structure and transmission mode),
ISAC signal processing (single-node sensing and multi-node
collaborative sensing), and ISAC signal optimization in the
space-time-frequency domains.
29
DMG Sensing. For the DMG sensing procedure deﬁned by
IEEE 802.11bf, which is still an ongoing project at the time of
writing, there are various research directions that can be iden-
tiﬁed for further study, such as sensing security and privacy,
multi-band cooperative sensing, sensing in spectrum sharing
environments, integrating sensing and data transmissions. It
appears to have no effect on beam training/tracking in the
protocol speciﬁcation, because they are relatively independent
in the time domain. But in practice, from a beam management
standpoint, the sensing measurement result (e.g., an R-D-A
map), which provides an “image” of the surrounding envi-
ronment, can help reduce the overhead associated with beam
scanning and alignment. Work on this exciting topic remains
blank. An example for future beam management aided by Wi-
Fi sensing is to use the high-resolution sensing to solve the
problem of misalignment of extremely narrow beams on the
smartphone side due to tiny movements of the hand. The Wi-
Fi sensing report for small motion could well guide beam
selection in the high directional link, with the possibility of
signiﬁcantly improving robustness.
Collaborative Sensing. Single-node sensing has low cost
and simple structure, but the range of C&S is limited, which
makes it difﬁcult to sense the NLoS targets. To make up
for this deﬁciency, collaborative sensing [200] has drawn
increasing attention, which involves and collaborates with
multitude of sensors spatially scattered in a geographical area.
It can be used for sensing the environment with obstacles or
3D positioning imaging, and then for real-time beam alignment
and tracking. Obviously, leveraging multiple sensors to cover
the same target point enhances the sensing robustness, but it
has some problems such as high cost, complex structure and
difﬁcult data synchronization. Additionally, most researchers
focus on homogenous and static sensors installed in speciﬁc
locations. It is still an open issue how to collaborate multiple
sensors, especially mobile and/or heterogeneous sensors, to
perform sensing tasks with low time complexity. Heteroge-
neous sensors with distinct types, such as cameras and radar,
for collaborative sensing, also can be regarded as multi-modal
sensing. Data fusion for original multimodal information with
dimension mismatch is critical for sensing data processing
and interpretation. AI is the preferred technology for pro-
cessing multimodal data to achieve target recognition and
decision-making. Moreover, to meet the key requirements of
personalization, data privacy and communication efﬁciency for
intelligent sensing applications, federated sensing [201] based
on FL comes into public view. In this context, more devoted
efforts need to be made in collaborative sensing-aided beam
management to obtain training-free beam prediction.
Supported by RIS. RIS has shown great potential in
improving beamforming gain and reducing interference in
wireless communications. It is also expected to beneﬁt the
ISAC by providing better sensing coverage, accuracy and
resolution. Although limited, the research on RIS-assisted
ISAC is on the rise. RIS is not only conducive to improving
the accuracy and resolution of sensing and positioning by
providing an additional path to observe the target with LoS
path from a different angle, but also contributes a feasible new
solution to the challenging problem of target sensing without
LoS connections. To fully reap these beneﬁts, a key task will
be to properly deploy RISs according to the beamforming
requirements for C&S, and optimize RIS phase shift matrix
in real time by considering the sensing performance metrics
and co-channel interference of C&S. In return, an alternative
approach can be provided for the thorny beam management
problem posed by the passive nature of RIS by employing
the sensing function to measure the link parameters related to
communications. Research on this promising subject is sorely
lacking.
C. RIS-Enhanced 6G Framework
The beam management for traditional one-hop transmission
system is already a time-consuming and challenging task, and
it will be even worse under the two-hop paradigm, which
is unacceptable for 6G mmWave/THz communications, espe-
cially for mobile scenarios. Despite the initial attempts at two-
hop beam management design, the cost is still overwhelming,
which calls for designing more efﬁcient mechanisms. Mean-
while, the investigation on the more challenging scenarios of
RIS-assisted mmWave/THz systems is still limited.
Support for Mobility. For RIS-assisted systems, the vast
majority of current research is aimed at designing RIS pas-
sive beamforming to increase the achievable rate, while the
research on beam management issues that greatly affects the
performance of mmWave/THz communications is far from
enough. The existing beam management mechanisms for con-
ventional one-hop communication topology are difﬁcult to
directly extend to the new two-hop topology due to the passive
of RIS. The lack of RF chains results in the inability of RIS
to sense signal, which further complicates beam training for
the paths assisted by RIS. Besides, to adapt to time-varying
channels due to user mobility, RIS passive beam training
should be jointly coordinated with the active beam training on
the AP/BS and/or users. Although some beam management
solutions can be used to support certain RIS beamforming
performance for RIS-assisted mmWave/THz communications,
they remain large channel estimation complexity and training
overhead/delay that scale with the number of RIS reﬂecting
elements and the BS/user antennas, making it hard for these
systems to support mobile scenarios, especially high-mobility
scenarios. As discussed before, having sensing capability at
RIS may be a good option for beam tracking. With the sensing
capability, RIS can obtain rich information about the position
and mobility pattern of user as well as the environment layout,
from which RIS can infer its future user-side beam from the
current/previous beam sequence.
Multi-Cell Multi-RIS. The mmWave/THz communication
network featured by dense or even ultra-dense small cells is
promoted as one of the technical trends to meet the high
capacity requirements of future mobile networks. Besides,
to fully tap the potential of RIS, a number of RISs can be
deployed in the cell to provide more path diversity to bypass
the dense and scattered obstacles in a complex environment. In
this context, for beam management procedure, the user need
to jointly determine and coordinate the connected RIS(s) and
AP(s)/BS(s), which is quite challenging. The limited beam
30
management schemes for RIS-assisted systems usually focus
on single cell scenarios, especially those with only one RIS,
but rarely consider multi-cell scenarios with dense RISs. There
is a hard way to go from single-cell single-RIS to future
multi-cell multi-RIS beam management. Meanwhile, most of
the existing beam management mechanisms focus on beam
training and alignment when users move in a limited area,
while few discuss beam switching (or seamless handover) in
high mobility applications, where link blockage may occur
frequently when user moves between different cells. When it
comes to the RIS-assisted network, more frequent handovers
between RISs in the same cell or between different cells are
required to ensure the link quality of users in real time. The
conventional handover mechanisms may not be suitable for the
new network paradigm, and more ﬂexible and effective mech-
anisms are needed to deal with multi-point beam handover.
Multi-User and MIMO. In general, an AP/BS can serve
multiple users simultaneously by allocating different time,
frequency, and beam resources to different users. Most existing
work on beam management for RIS-assisted systems focuses
on the single-user scenario. It is important to extend that to
general multi-user scenarios. Furthermore, future users in 6G
mmWave/THz communication systems are most likely to be
equipped with multiple antennas, but currently the majority of
studies are on single-antenna users. Efﬁcient beam manage-
ment against unfavorable propagation characteristics for RIS-
assisted multi-user multi-antenna scenario is very challenging,
which is still an open problem that requires future research
consideration. To serve multiple users simultaneously, one
RIS reﬂecting beam with this ability may be designed, or the
RIS can be divided into multiple sub-arrays to serve different
users with different reﬂecting beams. In addition, despite the
aforementioned new challenges of integrating multiple RISs to
mmWave/THz communications, a notable advantage is that the
path parameter estimation can be cross veriﬁed. For example,
three accurate estimates of AoA/AoD, associated with other
essential information, e.g., direction of arrays, can yield the
location of user, and the location information will in turn
reproduce the path parameters [168]. In this way, the path
parameters of multi-RIS-assisted mmWave/THz MIMO can
be enhanced according to their geometric relationship.
Bring in Active Ability. The passivity of fully-passive
RIS makes beam management process difﬁcult to handle.
Happily, to overcome the fundamental limitations posed by
RIS passivity, different kinds of RISs are currently under
research and design for wireless communication systems, such
as semi-passive RIS composed of passive reﬂectors and active
sensors [183], [185], [202], relay-type RIS in which a few
elements serve as active relays [203], active RIS that actively
reﬂect signals with ampliﬁcation [204], and reconﬁgurable
distributed antennas and reﬂecting surfaces (RDARS) moti-
vated by distributed antenna system [205]. Unlike conven-
tional fully-passive RISs, one common design philosophy for
these RIS variants is to introduce some active features while
maintaining low-cost and low-energy-consumption beneﬁts.
As such, a remarkable active gain to RIS-assisted systems can
be provided. The active ability may also enable efﬁcient beam
management for the cascaded channel. For instance, with the
proposed RDARS architecture, the passivity is less restrictive
to beam management than with a fully-passive RIS, because
beam training with RIS elements programmed in connected
(i.e., active) mode can be readily used for that in reﬂection
mode. In this regard, the potential of using the active ability
of the newly designed RISs to deal with its passive beam
management is worth exploring.
D. THz Beam Management Towards 6G
It must be pointed out that most existing beam management
schemes are aimed at mmWave communication scenarios. Al-
though THz beam management is similar to that of mmWave
in terms of features, basics, techniques, and challenges, more
in-depth and targeted research is necessary. It is because that,
to compensate the higher propagation loss than mmWave,
much narrower beams are required for THz communications to
obtain more beneﬁts from the beamforming gain, which further
complicates the beam management process. The research on
this topic is still in its infancy.
In addition to the open issues listed in subsection A-C,
THz beam management in 6G wireless networks also faces
some unique issues. One of the reasons is that, compared
with mmWaves, THz communication systems are more likely
to use extremely large-scale massive MIMO and ultra-large-
scale RIS, which incurs the near-ﬁeld effect, making beam
management more challenging. For example, for the most
commonly used codebook-based beam training in the near-
ﬁeld, both the direction and distance from the transmitter to the
receiver need to be considered in the codebook design, which
is different from that in the far-ﬁeld, and the training overhead
is extremely high. In practice, the near-ﬁeld effect has a
signiﬁcant impact on the performance of beam management.
Unfortunately, this important new problem has not been well
studied in the literature. Most of the current contributions
are based on the far-ﬁeld, yet the far-ﬁeld codebooks cannot
match near-ﬁeld channels. That is to say, the far-ﬁeld beam
training will cause serious performance loss of near-ﬁeld THz
communications in extremely large-scale massive MIMO or
ultra-large-scale RIS-assisted systems. In this context, it is
crucial to deeply consider near-ﬁeld effects in THz beam
management.
V. CONCLUSIONS
Key challenges for the feasibility of mmWave and THz
communication systems are the rapid channel ﬂuctuation and
frequent deafness (beam misalignment) between the commu-
nication endpoints. In this regard, it is important to prop-
erly design efﬁcient initial access and tracking strategies to
periodically identify the optimal beam pair with which a
transmitter (e.g., BS) and a receiver (e.g., mobile terminal) can
communicate. The recent developments and future challenges
in beam management algorithms have been investigated in
this paper. Speciﬁcally, various state-of-the-art beam man-
agement technologies for AI-empowered, ISAC-enabled, and
RIS-enhanced 6G mmWave and THz communication networks
have been comprehensively surveyed.
31
We presented a classiﬁcation of papers on AI-based beam
management according to their training modes (independent
or collaborative), AI paradigms (SL or RL), and AI models,
and summarized the key contributions of these solutions. We
broadly divided the existing beam management approaches
in ISAC systems into four major categories based on the
sensing technologies employed, namely, radar sensing, com-
munication signal sensing, C&S hybrid signal sensing, and
hiring dedicated sensors. In highly mobile systems such as
V2X, where the network topology and surroundings are time-
varying, sensing-aided techniques are envisioned as most
promising candidates to detect and track cars in real-time,
so as to facilitate beam management process. In addition,
we carefully discussed the extensibility and limitations of the
existing beam management solutions of conventional mmWave
and THz systems toward the RIS-assisted new paradigm,
and concluded that the AI-driven and sensing-aided beam
management frameworks will play an essential role for the
implementation of RIS-enhanced networks. Finally, several
potential technical concerns of future beam management were
discussed. This survey may serve as an enlightening guideline
for the research work of mmWave and THz communications
towards 6G.
COMMON ABBREVIATION LIST
AoA
Angle of Arrival
AoD
Angle of Departure
AC
Actor-Critic
AI
Artiﬁcial Intelligence
AP
Access Point
BFT
Beamforming Training
BS
Base Stations
CNN
Convolutional Neural Network
CSI
Channel State Information
DDPG
Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
DL
Deep Learning
DMG
Directional Multi-Gigabit
DQN
Deep Q-Network
DRL
Deep Reinforcement Learning
FL
Federated Learning
IoT
Internet of Things
ISAC
Integrated Sensing and Communication
LoS
Line-of-Sight
LSTM
Long Short-Term Memory
mmWave
Millimeter wave
MAB
Multi-Armed Bandit
MAC
Medium Access Control
MDP
Markov Decision Process
MIMO
Multiple-Input Multiple-Output
MISO
Multiple-Input Single-Output
MU-MIMO Multi-user MIMO
ML
Machine Learning
NLoS
Non-Line-of-Sight
NR
New Radio
OFDM
Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiplexing
POMDP
Partially Observable MDP
RAN
Radio Access Network
RF
Radio Frequency
RIS
Reconﬁgurable Intelligent Surface
RL
Reinforcement Learning
RSU
Roadside Unit
SL
Supervised Learning
STA
Station
SU-MIMO
Single-user MIMO
SVM
Support Vector Machine
THz
Terahertz
TL
Transfer Learning
TRP
Transmission-Reception Point
UAV
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
UE
User Equipment
URLLC
Ultra-Reliable Low-Latency Communication
V2I
Vehicle-to-infrastructure
V2X
Vehicle-to-everything
WLAN
Wireless Local Area Network
WPAN
Wireless Personal Area Network
REFERENCES
[1] “IEEE standard for information technology- Telecommunications and
information exchange between systems- Local and metropolitan area
networks- Speciﬁc requirements- Part 11: Wireless LAN medium
access control (MAC) and physical layer (PHY) speciﬁcations Amend-
ment 3: Enhancements for very high throughput in the 60 GHz band,”
IEEE Std 802.11ad-2012 (Amendment to IEEE Std 802.11-2012, as
amended by IEEE Std 802.11ae-2012 and IEEE Std 802.11aa-2012),
pp. 1–628, 2012.
[2] “IEEE standard for information technology- Telecommunications and
information exchange between systems- Local and metropolitan area
networks- Speciﬁc requirements- Part 11: Wireless LAN medium
access control (MAC) and physical layer (PHY) speciﬁcations Amend-
ment 2: Enhanced throughput for operations in license-exempt bands
above 45 GHz,” IEEE Std 802.11ay-2021 (Amendment to IEEE Std
802.11-2020 as amendment by IEEE Std 802.11ax-2021), pp. 1–768,
2021.
[3] “IEEE standard for information technology- Telecommunications and
information exchange between systems- Local and metropolitan area
networks- Speciﬁc requirements- Part 15.3: Wireless medium access
control (MAC) and physical layer (PHY) speciﬁcations for high rate
wireless personal area networks (WPANs) Amendment 2: Millimeter-
wave-based alternative physical layer extension,” IEEE Std 802.15.3c-
2009 (Amendment to IEEE Std 802.15.3-2003), pp. 1–200, 2009.
[4] “Technical speciﬁcation group services and system aspects; Release 15
description; Summary of Rel-15 work items (Release 15),” 3GPP TR
21.915 V15.0.0, pp. 1–118, Sept. 2019.
[5] “Technical speciﬁcation group services and system aspects; Release 16
description; Summary of Rel-16 work items (Release 16),” 3GPP TR
21.916 V16.2.0, pp. 1–163, June 2022.
[6] “Technical speciﬁcation group services and system aspects; Release 17
description; Summary of Rel-17 work items (Release 17),” 3GPP TR
21.917 V1.0.0, pp. 1–164, Sept. 2022.
[7] X. Lin, “An overview of 5G advanced evolution in 3GPP Release 18,”
IEEE Communications Standards Magazine, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 77–83,
2022.
[8] “IEEE standard for high data rate wireless multi-media networks-
Amendment 2: 100 Gb/s wireless switched point-to-point physical
layer,” IEEE Std 802.15.3d-2017 (Amendment to IEEE Std 802.15.3-
2016 as amended by IEEE Std 802.15.3e-2017), pp. 1–55, 2017.
[9] Z. Zhang, Y. Xiao, Z. Ma, M. Xiao, Z. Ding, X. Lei, G. K. Kara-
giannidis, and P. Fan, “6G wireless networks: Vision, requirements,
architecture, and key technologies,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Mag-
azine, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 28–41, 2019.
[10] W. Saad, M. Bennis, and M. Chen, “A vision of 6G wireless systems:
Applications, trends, technologies, and open research problems,” IEEE
Network, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 134–142, 2020.
[11] M. Giordani, M. Polese, M. Mezzavilla, S. Rangan, and M. Zorzi,
“Toward 6G networks: Use cases and technologies,” IEEE Communi-
cations Magazine, vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 55–61, 2020.
32
[12] H. Tataria, M. Shaﬁ, A. F. Molisch, M. Dohler, H. Sjöland, and
F. Tufvesson, “6G wireless systems: Vision, requirements, challenges,
insights, and opportunities,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 109, no. 7,
pp. 1166–1199, 2021.
[13] C.-X. Wang, X. You, X. Gao, X. Zhu, Z. Li, C. Zhang, H. Wang,
Y. Huang, Y. Chen, H. Haas, J. S. Thompson, E. G. Larsson, M. D.
Renzo, W. Tong, P. Zhu, X. Shen, H. V. Poor, and L. Hanzo, “On
the road to 6G: Visions, requirements, key technologies and testbeds,”
IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, pp. 1–1, 2023.
[14] “IMT vision- Framework and overall objectives of the future develop-
ment of IMT for 2020 and beyond,” Recommendation ITU-R M.2083-0,
2015.
[15] J. Liu, Y. Shi, Z. M. Fadlullah, and N. Kato, “Space-air-ground inte-
grated network: A survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 2714–2741, 2018.
[16] K. B. Letaief, Y. Shi, J. Lu, and J. Lu, “Edge artiﬁcial intelligence for
6G: Vision, enabling technologies, and applications,” IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 5–36, 2022.
[17] F. Liu, Y. Cui, C. Masouros, J. Xu, T. X. Han, Y. C. Eldar, and
S. Buzzi, “Integrated sensing and communications: Toward dual-
functional wireless networks for 6G and beyond,” IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 1728–1767,
2022.
[18] M. Di Renzo, A. Zappone, M. Debbah, M.-S. Alouini, C. Yuen,
J. de Rosny, and S. Tretyakov, “Smart radio environments empowered
by reconﬁgurable intelligent surfaces: How it works, state of research,
and the road ahead,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communica-
tions, vol. 38, no. 11, pp. 2450–2525, 2020.
[19] Q. Xue, X. Fang, and C.-X. Wang, “Beamspace SU-MIMO for future
millimeter wave wireless communications,” IEEE Journal on Selected
Areas in Communications, vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 1564–1575, 2017.
[20] Q. Xue, X. Fang, M. Xiao, S. Mumtaz, and J. Rodriguez, “Beam
management for millimeter-wave beamspace MU-MIMO systems,”
IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 205–217,
2019.
[21] Q. Xue, Y. Sun, J. Wang, G. Feng, L. Yan, and S. Ma, “User-centric
association in ultra-dense mmWave networks via deep reinforcement
learning,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 3594–
3598, 2021.
[22] Q.
Xue
and
G.
Feng,
“A
robust
beam
tracking
scheme
for
millimeter wave HetNets,” Digital Communications and Networks,
vol.
8,
no.
6,
pp.
1115–1121,
2022.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352864822001821
[23] Q. Xue, Y.-J. Liu, Y. Sun, J. Wang, L. Yan, G. Feng, and S. Ma,
“Beam management in ultra-dense mmWave network via federated
reinforcement learning: An intelligent and secure approach,” IEEE
Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking, vol. 9,
no. 1, pp. 185–197, 2023.
[24] “Technical speciﬁcation group radio access network; Study on new
radio access technology Physical layer aspects (Release 14),” 3GPP
TR 38.802 V14.2.0, pp. 14–17, Sept. 2017.
[25] Y. Heng, J. G. Andrews, J. Mo, V. Va, A. Ali, B. L. Ng, and J. C.
Zhang, “Six key challenges for beam management in 5.5G and 6G
systems,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 74–79,
2021.
[26] Y.-N. R. Li, B. Gao, X. Zhang, and K. Huang, “Beam management in
millimeter-wave communications for 5G and beyond,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 13 282–13 293, 2020.
[27] “Technical speciﬁcation group radio access network; Study on new ra-
dio access technology: Radio frequency (RF) and co-existence aspects
(Release 14),” 3GPP TR 38.803 V14.3.0, p. 151, March 2022.
[28] “Technical speciﬁcation group radio access network; Study on require-
ments for NR beyond 52.6 GHz (Release 16),” 3GPP TR 38.807
V16.1.0, p. 65, March 2021.
[29] “Technical speciﬁcation group radio access networks; Study on ar-
tiﬁcial intelligence (AI)/machine learning (ML) for NR air interface
(Release 18),” 3GPP TR 38.843 V0.0.0, pp. 8–9, May 2022.
[30] “Technical speciﬁcation group radio access network; Study on new
radio (NR) to support non-terrestrial networks (Release 15),” 3GPP
TR 38.811 V15.4.0, p. 101, Sept.2020.
[31] “Technical speciﬁcation group radio access network; NR; Study on in-
tegrated access and backhaul (Release 16),” 3GPP TR 38.874 V16.0.0,
p. 18, Dec. 2018.
[32] S. Kutty and D. Sen, “Beamforming for millimeter wave commu-
nications: An inclusive survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys &
Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 949–973, 2016.
[33] A. F. Molisch, V. V. Ratnam, S. Han, Z. Li, S. L. H. Nguyen, L. Li,
and K. Haneda, “Hybrid beamforming for massive MIMO: A survey,”
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 134–141, 2017.
[34] I. Ahmed, H. Khammari, A. Shahid, A. Musa, K. S. Kim, E. De Poorter,
and I. Moerman, “A survey on hybrid beamforming techniques in 5G:
Architecture and system model perspectives,” IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 3060–3097, 2018.
[35] E. Onggosanusi, M. S. Rahman, L. Guo, Y. Kwak, H. Noh, Y. Kim,
S. Faxer, M. Harrison, M. Frenne, S. Grant, R. Chen, R. Tamrakar, Gao,
and Qiubin, “Modular and high-resolution channel state information
and beam management for 5G new radio,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 48–55, 2018.
[36] P. Zhou, K. Cheng, X. Han, X. Fang, Y. Fang, R. He, Y. Long, and
Y. Liu, “IEEE 802.11ay-based mmWave WLANs: Design challenges
and solutions,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 20,
no. 3, pp. 1654–1681, 2018.
[37] M. Giordani, M. Polese, A. Roy, D. Castor, and M. Zorzi, “A tutorial
on beam management for 3GPP NR at mmWave frequencies,” IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 173–196,
2019.
[38] A. Kose, H. Lee, C. H. Foh, and M. Dianati, “Beam-based mobility
management in 5G millimetre wave V2X communications: A survey
and outlook,” IEEE Open Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems,
vol. 2, pp. 347–363, 2021.
[39] J. Bang, H. Chung, J. Hong, H. Seo, J. Choi, and S. Kim, “Millimeter-
wave communications: Recent developments and challenges of hard-
ware and beam management algorithms,” IEEE Communications Mag-
azine, vol. 59, no. 8, pp. 86–92, 2021.
[40] W. Attaoui, K. Bouraqia, and E. Sabir, “Initial access & beam
alignment for mmWave and terahertz communications,” IEEE Access,
vol. 10, pp. 35 363–35 397, 2022.
[41] S. Szott, K. Kosek-Szott, P. Gawłowicz, J. T. Gómez, B. Bellalta,
A. Zubow, and F. Dressler, “Wi-Fi meets ML: A survey on improving
iEEE 802.11 performance with machine learning,” IEEE Communica-
tions Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1843–1893, 2022.
[42] J. A. Zhang, M. L. Rahman, K. Wu, X. Huang, Y. J. Guo, S. Chen, and
J. Yuan, “Enabling joint communication and radar sensing in mobile
networks - A survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 306–345, 2022.
[43] M. Qurratulain Khan, A. Gaber, P. Schulz, and G. Fettweis, “Machine
learning for millimeter wave and terahertz beam management: A survey
and open challenges,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 11 880–11 902, 2023.
[44] J. Guo, C.-K. Wen, S. Jin, and G. Y. Li, “Overview of deep learning-
based CSI feedback in massive MIMO systems,” IEEE Transactions
on Communications, vol. 70, no. 12, pp. 8017–8045, 2022.
[45] X. Yang, S. Ma, and S. Jin, “Antenna selection for asymmetrical
uplink and downlink transceivers in massive MIMO systems,” IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications, pp. 1–1, 2023.
[46] B. Zhou, A. Liu, and V. Lau, “Successive localization and beamforming
in 5G mmWave MIMO communication systems,” IEEE Transactions
on Signal Processing, vol. 67, no. 6, pp. 1620–1635, 2019.
[47] M. Giordani, M. Polese, A. Roy, D. Castor, and M. Zorzi, “Standalone
and non-standalone beam management for 3GPP NR at mmWaves,”
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 123–129, 2019.
[48] R. Wei, Q. Xue, S. Ma, Y. Xu, L. Yan, and X. Fang, “Joint optimization
of active and passive beamforming in multi-IRS aided mmWave
communications,” in 2022 IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps),
2022, pp. 136–141.
[49] Z. Lin, H. Niu, K. An, Y. Wang, G. Zheng, S. Chatzinotas, and
Y. Hu, “Refracting RIS-aided hybrid satellite-terrestrial relay networks:
Joint beamforming design and optimization,” IEEE Transactions on
Aerospace and Electronic Systems, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 3717–3724, 2022.
[50] G. Chen, Q. Wu, W. Chen, D. W. K. Ng, and L. Hanzo, “IRS-aided
wireless powered MEC systems: TDMA or NOMA for computation
ofﬂoading?” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 22,
no. 2, pp. 1201–1218, 2023.
[51] J. Guo, W. Chen, C.-K. Wen, and S. Jin, “Deep learning-based
two-timescale CSI feedback for beamforming design in RIS-assisted
communications,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 72,
no. 4, pp. 5452–5457, 2023.
[52] C. Jia, H. Gao, N. Chen, and Y. He, “Machine learning empowered
beam management for intelligent reﬂecting surface assisted mmWave
networks,” China Communications, vol. 17, no. 10, pp. 100–114, 2020.
[53] “IEEE guide for architectural framework and application of federated
machine learning,” IEEE Std 3652.1-2020, pp. 1–69, 2021.
[54] K. Ma,
Z. Wang, W. Tian, S. Chen,
and L. Hanzo,
“Deep
learning for beam management: Opportunities, state-of-the-arts and
33
challenges,” CoRR, vol. abs/2111.11177, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.11177
[55] M. Dai, N. Huang, Y. Wu, J. Gao, and Z. Su, “Unmanned-aerial-
vehicle-assisted wireless networks: Advancements, challenges, and
solutions,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 4117–
4147, 2023.
[56] Y. Long, Z. Chen, J. Fang, and C. Tellambura, “Data-driven-based ana-
log beam selection for hybrid beamforming under mm-Wave channels,”
IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, vol. 12, no. 2,
pp. 340–352, 2018.
[57] P. Zhou, X. Fang, X. Wang, Y. Long, R. He, and X. Han, “Deep
learning-based beam management and interference coordination in
dense mmWave networks,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technol-
ogy, vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 592–603, 2019.
[58] K. Satyanarayana, M. El-Hajjar, A. A. M. Mourad, and L. Hanzo,
“Deep learning aided ﬁngerprint-based beam alignment for mmWave
vehicular communication,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technol-
ogy, vol. 68, no. 11, pp. 10 858–10 871, 2019.
[59] Y. Yang, Z. Gao, Y. Ma, B. Cao, and D. He, “Machine learning enabling
analog beam selection for concurrent transmissions in millimeter-wave
V2V communications,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
vol. 69, no. 8, pp. 9185–9189, 2020.
[60] W. Ma, C. Qi, and G. Y. Li, “Machine learning for beam alignment
in millimeter wave massive MIMO,” IEEE Wireless Communications
Letters, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 875–878, 2020.
[61] M. Alrabeiah and A. Alkhateeb, “Deep learning for mmWave beam and
blockage prediction using sub-6 GHz channels,” IEEE Transactions on
Communications, vol. 68, no. 9, pp. 5504–5518, 2020.
[62] W. Yuan, C. Liu, F. Liu, S. Li, and D. W. K. Ng, “Learning-based
predictive beamforming for UAV communications with jittering,” IEEE
Wireless Communications Letters, vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 1970–1974, 2020.
[63] H. Echigo, Y. Cao, M. Bouazizi, and T. Ohtsuki, “A deep learning-
based low overhead beam selection in mmWave communications,”
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 682–
691, 2021.
[64] J. Zhang and C. Masouros, “Learning-based predictive transmitter-
receiver beam alignment in millimeter wave ﬁxed wireless access
links,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 69, pp. 3268–
3282, 2021.
[65] I. Ahmed, M. K. Shahid, H. Khammari, and M. Masud, “Machine
learning based beam selection with low complexity hybrid beamform-
ing design for 5G massive MIMO systems,” IEEE Transactions on
Green Communications and Networking, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 2160–2173,
2021.
[66] Y. Heng and J. G. Andrews, “Machine learning-assisted beam align-
ment for mmWave systems,” IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Commu-
nications and Networking, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 1142–1155, 2021.
[67] K. Ma, D. He, H. Sun, Z. Wang, and S. Chen, “Deep learning assisted
calibrated beam training for millimeter-wave communication systems,”
IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 69, no. 10, pp. 6706–6721,
2021.
[68] S. H. Lim, S. Kim, B. Shim, and J. W. Choi, “Deep learning-based
beam tracking for millimeter-wave communications under mobility,”
IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 69, no. 11, pp. 7458–
7469, 2021.
[69] L. Yan, X. Fang, Y. Fang, L. Hao, Q. Xue, and C. Xu, “KF-LSTM based
beam tracking for UAV-assisted mmWave HSR wireless networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 71, no. 10, pp.
10 796–10 807, 2022.
[70] S. Rezaie, E. de Carvalho, and C. N. Manchón, “A deep learning
approach to location- and orientation-aided 3D beam selection for
mmWave communications,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Commu-
nications, vol. 21, no. 12, pp. 11 110–11 124, 2022.
[71] Z. Zou, S. Zhao, G. Huang, and D. Tang, “Novel design of user
scheduling and analog beam selection in downlink millimeter-wave
communications,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 9, no. 6, pp.
4168–4178, 2022.
[72] T. T. Nguyen and K.-K. Nguyen, “A deep learning framework for
beam selection and power control in massive MIMO - millimeter-wave
communications,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, pp. 1–1,
2022.
[73] W. Liu, H. Ren, C. Pan, and J. Wang, “Deep learning based beam
training for extremely large-scale massive MIMO in near-ﬁeld domain,”
IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 170–174, 2023.
[74] Y. Liu, M. Li, J. Zhang, M. Wu, and L. Li, “Deep learning aided two-
stage multi-ﬁnger beam training in millimeter-wave communication,”
IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 26–30, 2023.
[75] M. B. Booth, V. Suresh, N. Michelusi, and D. J. Love, “Multi-
armed bandit beam alignment and tracking for mobile millimeter wave
communications,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 23, no. 7, pp.
1244–1248, 2019.
[76] W. Wu, N. Cheng, N. Zhang, P. Yang, W. Zhuang, and X. Shen,
“Fast mmwave beam alignment via correlated bandit learning,” IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 18, no. 12, pp. 5894–
5908, 2019.
[77] J. Zhang, Y. Huang, Y. Zhou, and X. You, “Beam alignment and
tracking for millimeter wave communications via bandit learning,”
IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 68, no. 9, pp. 5519–5533,
2020.
[78] R. Gupta, K. Lakshmanan, and A. K. Sah, “Beam alignment for
mmWave using non-stationary bandits,” IEEE Communications Letters,
vol. 24, no. 11, pp. 2619–2622, 2020.
[79] J. Zhang, Y. Huang, J. Wang, X. You, and C. Masouros, “Intelligent
interactive beam training for millimeter wave communications,” IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 2034–
2048, 2021.
[80] L.-H. Shen, T.-W. Chang, K.-T. Feng, and P.-T. Huang, “Design and
implementation for deep learning based adjustable beamforming train-
ing for millimeter wave communication systems,” IEEE Transactions
on Vehicular Technology, vol. 70, no. 3, pp. 2413–2427, 2021.
[81] Q. Hu, Y. Liu, Y. Cai, G. Yu, and Z. Ding, “Joint deep reinforcement
learning and unfolding: Beam selection and precoding for mmWave
multiuser MIMO with lens arrays,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, vol. 39, no. 8, pp. 2289–2304, 2021.
[82] D. Li, S. Wang, H. Zhao, and X. Wang, “Context-and-social-aware
online beam selection for mmWave vehicular communications,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 10, pp. 8603–8615, 2021.
[83] J. Zhang and C. Masouros, “Beam drift in millimeter wave links:
Beamwidth tradeoffs and learning based optimization,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Communications, vol. 69, no. 10, pp. 6661–6674, 2021.
[84] Y. Koda, M. Shinzaki, K. Yamamoto, T. Nishio, M. Morikura, Y. Shi-
rato, D. Uchida, and N. Kita, “Millimeter wave communications on
overhead messenger wire: Deep reinforcement learning-based predic-
tive beam tracking,” IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications
and Networking, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 1216–1232, 2021.
[85] M. Hussain and N. Michelusi, “Learning and adaptation for millimeter-
wave beam tracking and training: A dual timescale variational frame-
work,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 40,
no. 1, pp. 37–53, 2022.
[86] M. Shinzaki, Y. Koda, K. Yamamoto, T. Nishio, M. Morikura, Y. Shi-
rato, D. Uchida, and N. Kita, “Zero-shot adaptation for mmWave beam-
tracking on overhead messenger wires through robust adversarial rein-
forcement learning,” IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications
and Networking, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 232–245, 2022.
[87] T. Zhang, K. Zhu, J. Wang, and Z. Han, “Cost-efﬁcient beam man-
agement and resource allocation in millimeter wave backhaul HetNets
with hybrid energy supply,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communi-
cations, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 3291–3306, 2022.
[88] V. Raj, N. Nayak, and S. Kalyani, “Deep reinforcement learning
based blind mmWave MIMO beam alignment,” IEEE Transactions on
Wireless Communications, vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 8772–8785, 2022.
[89] J. Park, S. Hwang, H. Lee, and I. Lee, “Deep recurrent Q-network
methods for mmWave beam tracking systems,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, vol. 71, no. 12, pp. 13 429–13 434, 2022.
[90] D. Zhang, S. Shen, C. She, M. Xiao, Z. Pang, Y. Li, and L. Wang,
“Training beam sequence design for mmWave tracking systems with
and without environmental knowledge,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, vol. 21, no. 12, pp. 10 780–10 795, 2022.
[91] A. M. Elbir and S. Coleri, “Federated learning for hybrid beamforming
in mm-Wave massive MIMO,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 24,
no. 12, pp. 2795–2799, 2020.
[92] M. B. Mashhadi, M. Jankowski, T.-Y. Tung, S. Kobus, and D. Gündüz,
“Federated mmWave beam selection utilizing LIDAR data,” IEEE
Wireless Communications Letters, vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 2269–2273,
2021.
[93] Y. Xiao, Y. Ye, S. Huang, L. Hao, Z. Ma, M. Xiao, S. Mumtaz,
and O. A. Dobre, “Fully decentralized federated learning-based on-
board mission for UAV swarm system,” IEEE Communications Letters,
vol. 25, no. 10, pp. 3296–3300, 2021.
[94] C. Xu, S. Liu, Z. Yang, Y. Huang, and K.-K. Wong, “Learning rate op-
timization for federated learning exploiting over-the-air computation,”
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 39, no. 12,
pp. 3742–3756, 2021.
34
[95] P.-C. Hsu, L.-H. Shen, C.-H. Liu, and K.-T. Feng, “Federated deep
reinforcement learning for THz-beam search with limited CSI,” in 2022
IEEE 96th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC2022-Fall), 2022, pp.
1–6.
[96] Z. Zhang, R. Yang, X. Zhang, C. Li, Y. Huang, and L. Yang, “Backdoor
federated learning-based mmWave beam selection,” IEEE Transactions
on Communications, vol. 70, no. 10, pp. 6563–6578, 2022.
[97] I. Chafaa, R. Negrel, E. V. Belmega, and M. Debbah, “Self-supervised
deep learning for mmWave beam steering exploiting sub-6 GHz
channels,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 21,
no. 10, pp. 8803–8816, 2022.
[98] C. Zhong, H. Yang, and X. Yuan, “Over-the-air federated multi-task
learning over MIMO multiple access channels,” IEEE Transactions on
Wireless Communications, pp. 1–1, 2022.
[99] M. Tian, Z. Zhang, Q. Xu, and L. Yang, “A privacy-preserved split
learning solution for deep learning-based mmWave beam selection,”
IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 1474–1478, 2022.
[100] H. Chen, C. Sun, F. Jiang, and J. Jiang, “Beams selection for mmWave
multi-connection based on sub-6GHz predicting and parallel transfer
learning,” in 2021 IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communi-
cations in China (ICCC), 2021, pp. 469–474.
[101] S. Rezaie, A. Amiri, E. de Carvalho, and C. N. Manchón, “Deep
transfer learning for location-aware millimeter wave beam selection,”
IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 25, no. 9, pp. 2963–2967, 2021.
[102] H. Zarini, M. R. Mili, M. Rasti, S. Andreev, P. H. J. Nardelli,
and M. Bennis, “Intelligent analog beam selection and beamspace
channel tracking in THz massive MIMO with lens antenna array,” IEEE
Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking, pp. 1–1,
2023.
[103] N. Van Huynh, D. N. Nguyen, D. T. Hoang, and E. Dutkiewicz,
“Optimal beam association for high mobility mmWave vehicular
networks: Lightweight parallel reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE
Transactions on Communications, vol. 69, no. 9, pp. 5948–5961, 2021.
[104] W. Lei, D. Zhang, Y. Ye, and C. Lu, “Joint beam training and data
transmission control for mmWave delay-sensitive communications: A
parallel reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE Journal of Selected
Topics in Signal Processing, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 447–459, 2022.
[105] H. Hojatian, J. Nadal, J.-F. Frigon, and F. Leduc-Primeau, “Decen-
tralized beamforming for cell-free massive MIMO with unsupervised
learning,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 1042–1046,
2022.
[106] Y. Zuo, J. Guo, N. Gao, Y. Zhu, S. Jin, and X. Li, “A survey of
blockchain and artiﬁcial intelligence for 6G wireless communications,”
2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.08604
[107] M. Chen, U. Challita, W. Saad, C. Yin, and M. Debbah, “Artiﬁcial
neural networks-based machine learning for wireless networks: A
tutorial,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 4,
pp. 3039–3071, 2019.
[108] T. Nitsche, A. B. Flores, E. W. Knightly, and J. Widmer, “Steering with
eyes closed: Mm-Wave beam steering without in-band measurement,”
in 2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Communications (INFOCOM),
2015, pp. 2416–2424.
[109] M. Hashemi, C. E. Koksal, and N. B. Shroff, “Out-of-band millimeter
wave beamforming and communications to achieve low latency and
high energy efﬁciency in 5G systems,” IEEE Transactions on Commu-
nications, vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 875–888, 2018.
[110] K. Ma, P. Zhao, and Z. wang, “Deep learning assisted beam prediction
using out-of-band information,” in 2020 IEEE 91st Vehicular Technol-
ogy Conference (VTC2020-Spring), 2020, pp. 1–5.
[111] K. Ma, D. He, H. Sun, and Z. Wang, “Deep learning assisted mmWave
beam prediction with prior low-frequency information,” in ICC 2021 -
IEEE International Conference on Communications, 2021, pp. 1–6.
[112] K. T. Selvan and R. Janaswamy, “Fraunhofer and fresnel distances:
Uniﬁed derivation for aperture antennas,” IEEE Antennas and Propa-
gation Magazine, vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 12–15, 2017.
[113] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction
(second edition), 2018, pp. 1–526.
[114] A.
Slivkins,
“Introduction
to
multi-armed
bandits,”
CoRR,
vol.
abs/1904.07272,
2019.
[Online].
Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1904.07272
[115] H. van Hasselt, A. Guez, and D. Silver, “Deep reinforcement learning
with double Q-learning,” Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, vol. 30, no. 1, Mar. 2016. [Online]. Available:
https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/10295
[116] M. J. Hausknecht and P. Stone, “Deep recurrent Q-learning for
partially
observable
MDPs,”
CoRR,
vol.
abs/1507.06527,
2015.
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1507.06527
[117] M. A. Hossain, A. R. Hossain, and N. Ansari, “AI in 6G: Energy-
efﬁcient distributed machine learning for multilayer heterogeneous
networks,” IEEE Network, vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 84–91, 2022.
[118] S. Duan, D. Wang, J. Ren, F. Lyu, Y. Zhang, H. Wu, and X. Shen,
“Distributed artiﬁcial intelligence empowered by end-edge-cloud com-
puting: A survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 25,
no. 1, pp. 591–624, 2023.
[119] Z. Li, N. Zhu, D. Wu, H. Wang, and R. Wang, “Energy-efﬁcient mobile
edge computing under delay constraints,” IEEE Transactions on Green
Communications and Networking, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 776–786, 2022.
[120] D. C. Nguyen, M. Ding, P. N. Pathirana, A. Seneviratne, J. Li,
and H. Vincent Poor, “Federated learning for internet of things: A
comprehensive survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1622–1658, 2021.
[121] Z. Li, Y. Zhou, D. Wu, T. Tang, and R. Wang, “Fairness-aware
federated learning with unreliable links in resource-constrained internet
of things,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 9, no. 18, pp. 17 359–
17 371, 2022.
[122] H.
B.
McMahan,
E.
Moore,
D.
Ramage,
and
B.
A.
y Arcas, “Communication-efﬁcient learning of deep networks from
decentralized data,” CoRR, vol. abs/1602.05629v4, 2023. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1602.05629
[123] K. Yang, T. Jiang, Y. Shi, and Z. Ding, “Federated learning via over-
the-air computation,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications,
vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 2022–2035, 2020.
[124] J. Park, S. Samarakoon, A. Elgabli, J. Kim, M. Bennis, S.-L. Kim, and
M. Debbah, “Communication-efﬁcient and distributed learning over
wireless networks: Principles and applications,” Proceedings of the
IEEE, vol. 109, no. 5, pp. 796–819, 2021.
[125] F. Zhuang, Z. Qi, K. Duan, D. Xi, Y. Zhu, H. Zhu, H. Xiong, and
Q. He, “A comprehensive survey on transfer learning,” Proceedings of
the IEEE, vol. 109, no. 1, pp. 43–76, 2021.
[126] A. V. Clemente, H. N. C. Martínez, and A. Chandra, “Efﬁcient parallel
methods for deep reinforcement learning,” CoRR, vol. abs/1705.04862,
2017. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1705.04862
[127] N. González-Prelcic, R. Méndez-Rial, and R. W. Heath, “Radar aided
beam alignment in mmWave V2I communications supporting antenna
diversity,” in 2016 Information Theory and Applications Workshop
(ITA), 2016, pp. 1–7.
[128] A. Ali, N. González-Prelcic, and A. Ghosh, “Passive radar at the
roadside unit to conﬁgure millimeter wave vehicle-to-infrastructure
links,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 69, no. 12,
pp. 14 903–14 917, 2020.
[129] S. Huang, M. Zhang, Y. Gao, and Z. Feng, “MIMO radar aided
mmWave time-varying channel estimation in MU-MIMO V2X com-
munications,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 20,
no. 11, pp. 7581–7594, 2021.
[130] B. Chang, W. Tang, X. Yan, X. Tong, and Z. Chen, “Integrated
scheduling of sensing, communication, and control for mmWave/THz
communications in cellular connected UAV networks,” IEEE Journal
on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 40, no. 7, pp. 2103–2113,
2022.
[131] L. Yan, X. Fang, S. Li, Y. Li, and Q. Xue, “DRL based beam
management for joint sensing and communications in HSR mmWave
wireless networks,” in 2022 IEEE 95th Vehicular Technology Confer-
ence: (VTC2022-Spring), 2022, pp. 1–6.
[132] U. Demirhan and A. Alkhateeb, “Radar aided 6G beam prediction:
Deep learning algorithms and real-world demonstration,” in 2022 IEEE
Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), 2022,
pp. 2655–2660.
[133] R.
Du,
H.
Xie,
M.
Hu,
Narengerile,
Y.
Xin,
S.
McCann,
M.
Montemurro,
T.
X.
Han,
and
J.
Xu,
“An
overview
on
IEEE
802.11bf:
WLAN
sensing,”
2022.
[Online].
Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.04859
[134] W. Chen, L. Li, Z. Chen, T. Quek, and S. Li, “Enhancing THz/mmWave
network beam alignment with integrated sensing and communication,”
IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 1698–1702, 2022.
[135] W. Chen, L. Li, Z. Chen, B. Ning, G. Wang, and T. Quek, “An
ISAC-based beam alignment approach for enhancing terahertz network
coverage,” 2022. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.01728
[136] F. Liu, W. Yuan, C. Masouros, and J. Yuan, “Radar-assisted predictive
beamforming for vehicular links: Communication served by sensing,”
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 19, no. 11, pp.
7704–7719, 2020.
[137] W. Yuan, F. Liu, C. Masouros, J. Yuan, D. W. K. Ng, and N. González-
Prelcic, “Bayesian predictive beamforming for vehicular networks: A
35
low-overhead joint radar-communication approach,” IEEE Transactions
on Wireless Communications, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 1442–1456, 2021.
[138] Y. Xu, Y. Guo, C. Li, B. Xia, and Z. Chen, “Predictive beam tracking
with cooperative sensing for vehicle-to-infrastructure communications,”
in 2021 IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in
China (ICCC), 2021, pp. 835–840.
[139] S. Li, W. Yuan, C. Liu, Z. Wei, J. Yuan, B. Bai, and D. W. K. Ng,
“A novel ISAC transmission framework based on spatially-spread or-
thogonal time frequency space modulation,” IEEE Journal on Selected
Areas in Communications, vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 1854–1872, 2022.
[140] Z. Du, F. Liu, W. Yuan, C. Masouros, Z. Zhang, S. Xia, and G. Caire,
“Integrated sensing and communications for V2I networks: Dynamic
predictive beamforming for extended vehicle targets,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Wireless Communications, pp. 1–1, 2022.
[141] X.
Meng,
F.
Liu,
C.
Masouros,
W.
Yuan,
Q.
Zhang,
and
Z. Feng, “Vehicular connectivity on complex trajectories: Roadway-
geometry aware ISAC beam-tracking,” 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.11749
[142] J. Bao, D. Sun, and H. Li, “Motion sensor aided beam tracking in
mobile devices of millimeter-wave communications,” in 2018 IEEE
International Conference on Communications (ICC), 2018, pp. 1–7.
[143] A. Klautau, N. González-Prelcic, and R. W. Heath, “LIDAR data
for deep learning-based mmWave beam-selection,” IEEE Wireless
Communications Letters, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 909–912, 2019.
[144] W. Xu, F. Gao, S. Jin, and A. Alkhateeb, “3D scene-based beam selec-
tion for mmWave communications,” IEEE Wireless Communications
Letters, vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 1850–1854, 2020.
[145] M. Alrabeiah, A. Hredzak, and A. Alkhateeb, “Millimeter wave base
stations with cameras: Vision-aided beam and blockage prediction,” in
2020 IEEE 91st Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC2020-Spring),
2020, pp. 1–5.
[146] D. Wu, Y. Zeng, S. Jin, and R. Zhang, “Environment-aware and
training-free beam alignment for mmWave massive MIMO via channel
knowledge map,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference on Commu-
nications Workshops (ICC Workshops), 2021, pp. 1–7.
[147] Y. Tian and C. Wang, “Vision-aided beam tracking: Explore the proper
use of camera images with deep learning,” in 2021 IEEE 94th Vehicular
Technology Conference (VTC2021-Fall), 2021, pp. 01–05.
[148] Z. Hu and C. Han, “Image and index fused sequence-to-sequence
algorithm
for
vision-aided
millimeter-wave
beam
tracking,”
in
Proceedings of the 5th ACM Workshop on Millimeter-Wave and
Terahertz Networks and Sensing Systems, ser. mmNets ’21.
New
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2021, pp.
7–12. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3477081.3481678
[149] G. Charan, M. Alrabeiah, and A. Alkhateeb, “Vision-aided 6G wireless
communications: Blockage prediction and proactive handoff,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 70, no. 10, pp. 10 193–
10 208, 2021.
[150] Q. Zhang and C. Yang, “Testbed and performance evaluation of 3D
mmWave beam tracking in mobility scenario,” in IEEE INFOCOM
2022 - IEEE Conference on Computer Communications Workshops
(INFOCOM WKSHPS), 2022, pp. 1–2.
[151] Q. Zhang, X. Zhang, and C. Yang, “Camera-sensing-assisted fast
mmWave beam tracking for connected automated vehicles,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 9, no. 20, pp. 20 630–20 639, 2022.
[152] Y. Yao, H. Zhou, and M. Erol-Kantarci, “Joint sensing and commu-
nications for deep reinforcement learning-based beam management
in 6G,” in GLOBECOM 2022 - 2022 IEEE Global Communications
Conference, 2022, pp. 5019–5024.
[153] G. Charan, T. Osman, A. Hredzak, N. Thawdar, and A. Alkhateeb,
“Vision-position multi-modal beam prediction using real millimeter
wave datasets,” in 2022 IEEE Wireless Communications and Network-
ing Conference (WCNC), 2022, pp. 2727–2731.
[154] S. Jiang and A. Alkhateeb, “Computer vision aided beam tracking in
a real-world millimeter wave deployment,” in 2022 IEEE Globecom
Workshops (GC Wkshps), 2022, pp. 142–147.
[155] G. Charan, A. Hredzak, C. Stoddard, B. Berrey, M. Seth, H. Nunez, and
A. Alkhateeb, “Towards real-world 6G drone communication: Position
and camera aided beam prediction,” in GLOBECOM 2022 - 2022 IEEE
Global Communications Conference, 2022, pp. 2951–2956.
[156] M. Zecchin, M. B. Mashhadi, M. Jankowski, D. Gündüz, M. Koun-
touris, and D. Gesbert, “LIDAR and position-aided mmWave beam
selection with non-local CNNs and curriculum training,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 71, no. 3, pp. 2979–2990, 2022.
[157] H. Ahn, I. Orikumhi, J. Kang, H. Park, H. Jwa, J. Na, and S. Kim,
“Machine learning-based vision-aided beam selection for mmWave
multiuser MISO system,” IEEE Wireless Communications Letters,
vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 1263–1267, 2022.
[158] M. Tian, Z. Zhang, Q. Xu, and L. Yang, “A personalized solution
for deep learning-based mmWave beam selection,” IEEE Wireless
Communications Letters, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 183–186, 2023.
[159] S. Jiang, G. Charan, and A. Alkhateeb, “LiDAR aided future beam
prediction in real-world millimeter wave V2I communications,” IEEE
Wireless Communications Letters, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 212–216, 2023.
[160] J. A. Zhang, X. Huang, Y. J. Guo, J. Yuan, and R. W. Heath,
“Multibeam for joint communication and radar sensing using steerable
analog antenna arrays,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 671–685, 2019.
[161] C. B. Barneto, S. D. Liyanaarachchi, T. Riihonen, L. Anttila, and
M. Valkama, “Multibeam design for joint communication and sensing
in 5G new radio networks,” in ICC 2020 - 2020 IEEE International
Conference on Communications (ICC), 2020, pp. 1–6.
[162] “IEEE P802.11bf/D1.0 draft standard for information technology-
telecommunications and information exchange between systems local
and metropolitan area networks- speciﬁc requirements Part 11: Wireless
LAN medium access control (MAC) and physical layer (PHY) speciﬁ-
cations Amendment 2: Enhancements for wireless LAN sensing,” IEEE
P802.11bf/D1.0 (Revision of IEEE P802.11REVme/D1.4, as amended
by IEEE P802.11be/D2.2), pp. 1–243, 2023.
[163] A. Zhang, M. L. Rahman, X. Huang, Y. J. Guo, S. Chen, and R. W.
Heath, “Perceptive mobile networks: Cellular networks with radio
vision via joint communication and radar sensing,” IEEE Vehicular
Technology Magazine, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 20–30, 2021.
[164] Z. Wei, Y. Wang, L. Ma, S. Yang, Z. Feng, C. Pan, Q. Zhang, Y. Wang,
H. Wu, and P. Zhang, “5G PRS-based sensing: A sensing reference
signal approach for joint sensing and communication system,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, pp. 1–15, 2022.
[165] Z. Wei, H. Qu, Y. Wang, X. Yuan, H. Wu, Y. Du, K. Han, N. Zhang,
and Z. Feng, “Integrated sensing and communication signals towards
5G-A and 6G: A survey,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, pp. 1–1,
2023.
[166] C. You, B. Zheng, and R. Zhang, “Fast beam training for IRS-assisted
multiuser communications,” IEEE Wireless Communications Letters,
vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 1845–1849, 2020.
[167] B. Ning, Z. Chen, W. Chen, Y. Du, and J. Fang, “Terahertz multi-
user massive MIMO with intelligent reﬂecting surface: Beam training
and hybrid beamforming,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 1376–1393, 2021.
[168] W. Wang and W. Zhang, “Joint beam training and positioning for in-
telligent reﬂecting surfaces assisted millimeter wave communications,”
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 20, no. 10, pp.
6282–6297, 2021.
[169] W. Mei and R. Zhang, “Distributed beam training for intelligent reﬂect-
ing surface enabled multi-hop routing,” IEEE Wireless Communications
Letters, vol. 10, no. 11, pp. 2489–2493, 2021.
[170] ——, “Intelligent reﬂecting surface for multi-path beam routing with
active/passive beam splitting and combining,” IEEE Communications
Letters, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 1165–1169, 2022.
[171] P. Wang, J. Fang, W. Zhang, Z. Chen, H. Li, and W. Zhang, “Beam
training and alignment for RIS-assisted millimeter-wave systems: State
of the art and beyond,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 29, no. 6,
pp. 64–71, 2022.
[172] X. Wei, L. Dai, Y. Zhao, G. Yu, and X. Duan, “Codebook design and
beam training for extremely large-scale RIS: Far-ﬁeld or near-ﬁeld?”
China Communications, vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 193–204, 2022.
[173] P. Wang, J. Fang, W. Zhang, and H. Li, “Fast beam training and
alignment for IRS-assisted millimeter wave/terahertz systems,” IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 2710–
2724, 2022.
[174] C. Rizza, V. Loscrí, and M. O. Parchin, “Real-time beam steering in
mmWave with reconﬁgurable intelligent meta-surfaces,” in 2021 IEEE
Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), 2021, pp. 1–6.
[175] C. Xiao, H. Huo, W. Xu, H. Sun, and C. Shu, “Reconﬁgurable intelli-
gent surface-aided indoor communication with neural beam alignment,”
in 2021 IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in
China (ICCC), 2021, pp. 546–550.
[176] N. Abuzainab, M. Alrabeiah, A. Alkhateeb, and Y. E. Sagduyu,
“Deep learning for THz drones with ﬂying intelligent surfaces: Beam
and handoff prediction,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference on
Communications Workshops (ICC Workshops), 2021, pp. 1–6.
[177] F. Sohrabi, T. Jiang, W. Cui, and W. Yu, “Active sensing for commu-
nications by learning,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communi-
cations, vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 1780–1794, 2022.
36
[178] L. Jiao, P. Wang, A. Alipour-Fanid, H. Zeng, and K. Zeng, “Enabling
efﬁcient blockage-aware handover in RIS-assisted mmWave cellular
networks,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 21,
no. 4, pp. 2243–2257, 2022.
[179] W. Liu, C. Pan, H. Ren, F. Shu, S. Jin, and J. Wang, “Low-overhead
beam training scheme for extremely large-scale RIS in near-ﬁeld,”
2022. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.15910
[180] H. Min, T. Zhou, T. Xu, Y. Huang, and H. Hu, “Stratiﬁed federated
learning-based beamforming design for heterogeneous IRSs-aided net-
works,” IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1–5,
2023.
[181] X. Wang, Z. Lin, F. Lin, and L. Hanzo, “Joint hybrid 3D beamforming
relying on sensor-based training for reconﬁgurable intelligent surface
aided terahertz-based multiuser massive MIMO systems,” IEEE Sen-
sors Journal, vol. 22, no. 14, pp. 14 540–14 552, 2022.
[182] M. Ouyang, Y. Wang, F. Gao, S. Zhang, P. Li, and J. Ren, “Computer
vision-aided reconﬁgurable intelligent surface-based beam tracking:
Prototyping and experimental results,” 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.05032
[183] S. Jiang, A. Hindy, and A. Alkhateeb, “Sensing aided reconﬁgurable
intelligent
surfaces
for
3GPP 5G transparent
operation,”
2022.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.13487
[184] K. Chen-Hu, G. C. Alexandropoulos, and A. g. Armada, “Differential
data-aided beam training for RIS-empowered multi-antenna communi-
cations,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 113 200–113 213, 2022.
[185] A. Taha, M. Alrabeiah, and A. Alkhateeb, “Enabling large intelligent
surfaces with compressive sensing and deep learning,” IEEE Access,
vol. 9, pp. 44 304–44 321, 2021.
[186] C. Huang, R. Mo, and C. Yuen, “Reconﬁgurable intelligent surface
assisted multiuser MISO systems exploiting deep reinforcement learn-
ing,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 38,
no. 8, pp. 1839–1850, 2020.
[187] Q. Zhang, W. Saad, and M. Bennis, “Millimeter wave communi-
cations with an intelligent reﬂector: Performance optimization and
distributional reinforcement learning,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 1836–1850, 2022.
[188] M.
A.
S.
Sejan,
M.
H.
Rahman,
B.-S.
Shin,
J.-H.
Oh,
Y.-
H.
You,
and
H.-K.
Song,
“Machine
learning
for
intelligent-
reﬂecting-surface-based
wireless
communication
towards
6G:
A
review,”
Sensors,
vol.
22,
no.
14,
2022.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/22/14/5405
[189] L. Li, D. Ma, H. Ren, D. Wang, X. Tang, W. Liang, and T. Bai,
“Enhanced reconﬁgurable intelligent surface assisted mmWave com-
munication: A federated learning approach,” China Communications,
vol. 17, no. 10, pp. 115–128, 2020.
[190] A. M. Elbir, K. V. Mishra, M. R. B. Shankar, and S. Chatzinotas,
“The rise of intelligent reﬂecting surfaces in integrated sensing and
communications paradigms,” IEEE Network, pp. 1–8, 2022.
[191] S. P. Chepuri, N. Shlezinger,
F. Liu, G. C. Alexandropoulos,
S. Buzzi, and Y. C. Eldar, “Integrated sensing and communications
with reconﬁgurable intelligent surfaces,” 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.01003
[192] L. Wang, L. F. Abanto-Leon, and A. Asadi, “Joint communication
and sensing in RIS-enabled mmWave networks,” 2022. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.03685
[193] J. Zuo, Y. Liu, C. Zhu, Y. Zou, D. Zhang, and N. Al-Dhahir,
“Exploiting NOMA and RIS in integrated sensing and communication,”
2022. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.02725
[194] H. Luo, R. Liu, M. Li, Y. Liu, and Q. Liu, “Joint beamforming design
for RIS-assisted integrated sensing and communication systems,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 71, no. 12, pp. 13 393–
13 397, 2022.
[195] Z. Zhu, Z. Li, Z. Chu, G. Sun, W. Hao, P. Xiao, and I. Lee,
“Resource allocation for IRS assisted mmWave integrated sensing and
communication systems,” in ICC 2022 - IEEE International Conference
on Communications, 2022, pp. 2333–2338.
[196] X. Song, D. Zhao, H. Hua, T. X. Han, X. Yang, and J. Xu, “Joint
transmit and reﬂective beamforming for IRS-assisted integrated sensing
and communication,” in 2022 IEEE Wireless Communications and
Networking Conference (WCNC), 2022, pp. 189–194.
[197] M. Hua, Q. Wu, C. He, S. Ma, and W. Chen, “Joint active and passive
beamforming design for IRS-aided radar-communication,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Wireless Communications, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 2278–2294,
2023.
[198] T. M. Hospedales, A. Antoniou, P. Micaelli, and A. J. Storkey, “Meta-
learning in neural networks: A survey,” CoRR, vol. abs/2004.05439,
2020. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.05439
[199] “Discussion
on
general
aspects
of
AI/ML
LCM,”
3GPP
TSG
RAN
WG1
Meeting
#112
(R1-
2301586),
pp.
1–10,
March
2023.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.3gpp.org/ftp/tsg_ran/WG1_RL1/TSGR1_112/Docs?sortby=sizerev
[200] S. He, K. Shi, C. Liu, B. Guo, J. Chen, and Z. Shi, “Collaborative
sensing in internet of things: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commu-
nications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1435–1474, 2022.
[201] Y. Gao, L. Liu, X. Zheng, C. Zhang, and H. Ma, “Federated sensing:
Edge-cloud elastic collaborative learning for intelligent sensing,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 14, pp. 11 100–11 111, 2021.
[202] Y. Lin, S. Jin, M. Matthaiou, and X. You, “Tensor-based algebraic
channel estimation for hybrid IRS-assisted MIMO-OFDM,” IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 3770–
3784, 2021.
[203] N. T. Nguyen, Q.-D. Vu, K. Lee, and M. Juntti, “Hybrid relay-
reﬂecting intelligent surface-assisted wireless communications,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 71, no. 6, pp. 6228–6244,
2022.
[204] Z. Zhang, L. Dai, X. Chen, C. Liu, F. Yang, R. Schober, and H. V.
Poor, “Active RIS vs. passive RIS: Which will prevail in 6G?” IEEE
Transactions on Communications, vol. 71, no. 3, pp. 1707–1725, 2023.
[205] C. Ma, X. Yang, J. Wang, G. Yang, and S. Ma, “Reconﬁgurable
distributed
antennas
and
reﬂecting
surface
(RDARS):
A
new
architecture for wireless communications,” 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.06950
