1
Adaptive Layer Splitting for Wireless LLM
Inference in Edge Computing: A Model-Based
Reinforcement Learning Approach
Yuxuan Chen, Rongpeng Li, Xiaoxue Yu, Zhifeng Zhao, and Honggang Zhang
Abstract—Optimizing the deployment of large language models
(LLMs) in edge computing environments is critical for enhancing
privacy and computational efficiency. Toward efficient wireless
LLM inference in edge computing, this study comprehensively
analyzes the impact of different splitting points in mainstream
open-source LLMs. On this basis, this study introduces a frame-
work taking inspiration from model-based reinforcement learning
(MBRL) to determine the optimal splitting point across the edge
and user equipment (UE). By incorporating a reward surrogate
model, our approach significantly reduces the computational
cost of frequent performance evaluations. Extensive simulations
demonstrate that this method effectively balances inference
performance and computational load under varying network
conditions, providing a robust solution for LLM deployment in
decentralized settings.
I. INTRODUCTION
The field of natural language processing (NLP) has recently
experienced transformative changes, driven by the rapid ad-
vancement of large language models (LLMs) such as GPT-
4 [1] and Gemini [2]. These models are highly proficient at
generating human-like text [3]–[7], catalyzing progress across
various domains [8]–[11]. Although LLMs perform well in
centralized cloud environments, they face significant scalabil-
ity and privacy issues [12], [13] in sensitive applications like
healthcare and finance [14], which have driven the exploration
of edge computing [15], [16] as a complementary paradigm.
Notably, edge computing processes sensitive information lo-
cally rather than traversing through a centralized cloud [17],
[18]. Consequently, it minimizes the exposure to potential
privacy breaches and unauthorized access. Moreover, edge
computing allows for a flexible and distributed architecture,
and can accommodate allocated computational resources to
specific requirements [19], [20]. Therefore, the integration
of edge computing and LLMs empowers LLMs with en-
hanced personalized and domain-specific generative capabili-
ties [21]. However, LLMs’ substantial computational demands
often exceed the processing capacities of communication-
limited user equipment (UE) in radio access network or
Internet of Things (IoT) systems [22]–[24]. Correspondingly,
split learning and inference [25]–[27] are proposed to jointly
leverage the computing capability of UE and edge nodes (e.g.,
base stations [BSs]).
Y. Chen, R. Li, X. Yu and H. Zhang are with Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou 310027, China, (email: {cyx00, lirongpeng, sdwhyxx, hong-
gangzhang}@zju.edu.cn).
Z. Zhao is with Zhejaing Lab, Hangzhou 310012, China as well as Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou 310027, China (email: zhaozf@zhejianglab.com).
User Equipment
Cloud
LLM
RL Agent
Edge Node
Transformer layer
Transformer layer
···
Transformer layer
Transformer layer
···
Transformer layer
Transformer layer
···
Layers deployed on UE 
Transformer layer
Transformer layer
Transformer layer
···
Layers deployed on 
Edge / Cloud 
Fig. 1: A high-level architecture of the framework, depicting
the distribution of the LLM across edge and UEs, highlights
the role of the RL agent in managing interactions between the
LLM and wireless networks.
Though most of the existing works [25], [26], [28]–[32]
focus on careful model splitting to balance the computational
and communication costs, splitting different layers of LLMs
is quite unique, as the intermediate outputs have consistent di-
mensions, leading to the same communication cost. Addition-
ally, transmitting tensors between LLM layers over potentially
noisy channels could hinder LLM inference performance. As
validated in this work lately, given different splitting points,
the possible loss induced by unreliable wireless channels
produces a significantly diverse impact on model performance.
These attributes necessitate a shift in focus from optimizing
transmission efficiency to managing the computational burden
on UE. In LLM deployment scenarios, where the scale and
complexity of the models impose significant demands on
UE’s limited computational resources, the challenge lies in
balancing the computational load without degrading inference
performance. Thus, it is critical to identify the optimal splitting
point for model inference while combating wireless channel
volatility. Such a viewpoint transcends traditional single-step
optimization techniques and warrants a new framework ac-
commodating the sequential nature of decision-making.
Reinforcement learning (RL) emerges as an apt methodol-
ogy, known for its proficiency in sequential decision-making
tasks [33]–[36]. RL learns optimal strategies over successive
arXiv:2406.02616v5  [cs.LG]  11 Sep 2024
2
iterations, continuously adapting to the dynamic and uncertain
edge environment. The iterative nature of RL, requiring multi-
ple interactions with the LLM to ascertain the rewards of dif-
ferent actions, complements the continuous and unpredictable
variations in wireless channels. Nevertheless, it inevitably
incurs significant interaction costs before collecting sufficient
records. Fortunately, with the merits in sampling efficiency,
model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) is particularly
suited to this context [37]–[40]. In particular, MBRL capably
simulates the uncertain environment and assesses the potential
outcomes of actions, thus enabling a more informed and
anticipatory optimization strategy for the dynamical splitting
point determination process.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, we propose an adaptive layer split-
ting algorithm for efficient LLM inference in edge computing,
where only a few selected transformer layers are provisionally
activated at the UE. Meanwhile, faced with wireless channel
fluctuations, we leverage a sample-efficient MBRL-inspired
approach to determine the suitable splitting point. While
highlighting the key differences with existing works in Table
I, the primary contributions of this paper are summarized as
follows.
• We comprehensively evaluate the impact of LLM splitting
points on LLM inference performance under varying
channel conditions, and formulate the determination of
appropriate LLM splitting points as a sequential decision-
making process.
• We leverage proximal policy optimization (PPO) [42]
for adaptive splitting point determination and devise a
sample-efficient reward surrogate model to facilitate the
learning.
• We conduct extensive empirical studies to evaluate the
robustness and effectiveness of the MBRL-inspired split-
ting point determination method.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
reviews related works, setting the context for our research.
Section III first describes our system model and highlights
the impact of splitting points on LLM inference performance.
Afterward, Section III presents the formulated problem, while
Section IV explores an MBRL-inspired splitting point deter-
mination solution. Section V presents our experimental setup
and results. Finally, we conclude the paper with future research
directions in Section VI.
II. RELATED WORKS
A. Edge-Enhanced LLM Deployment
In the realm of LLMs, [43], [44] provide a comprehensive
overview of the challenges faced by LLMs in cloud-based
settings, particularly emphasizing the constraints related to
data privacy and processing efficiency. [45] proposes the
concept of edge computing as a viable solution. Subsequently,
[21] proposes an LLM cloud-edge collaboration framework,
which utilizes small-scale models deployed at edge nodes
to enhance the generative capabilities of cloud-based LLMs.
Additionally, [22] emphasizes the importance of optimizing
LLM deployment at 6G edges but does not provide specific
methodologies for leveraging edge computing capabilities.
[46] proposes to use LLMs as offline compilers to meet
low-latency requirements in edge computing. However, these
approaches do not fully address the computational constraints
of edge nodes. Our research bridges this gap by introducing a
dynamical layer splitting framework to alleviate these limita-
tions.
B. Split Inference in Distributed Computing
[41] introduce to split models between clients and servers
to avoid transferring raw data, offering new perspectives on
distributed computing and privacy-preserving AI. [25], [28],
[29] broaden the application of split learning to encompass
the distributed deployment of deep neural networks (DNNs) in
wireless networks. [26], [30]–[32] distribute different portions
of DNNs between edge nodes and cloud for collaborative
inference task execution, thus reducing response latency and
improving the scalability.
Different from these existing works [26], [30]–[32], LLM
splitting presents unique challenges. Due to the large compu-
tational demands of LLMs, deploying different layers across
UE and edge nodes requires careful consideration of the
computational load on the UE. The significant disparity in
computational capabilities between heterogeneous devices fur-
ther complicates the deployment process [47], [48]. Also, split-
ting at different points within the LLM significantly impacts
the overall inference performance, as demonstrated by our
experiments in Section 3. To our best knowledge, this belongs
to the first efforts to address this important issue, and lays the
very foundation for further adaptive layer splitting to balance
LLM inference performance and UE computation cost.
C. Reinforcement Learning in Network Optimization
RL emerges as a pivotal tool for optimizing decision-
making processes in dynamic and uncertain environments,
as highlighted by [49], [50]. [51], [52] demonstrate RL’s
efficacy in enhancing performance optimization within dis-
tributed networks, highlighting its potential to adapt and
respond to evolving environmental conditions. In the context
of wireless network environments, [53], [54] leverage RL to
address the challenges of resource allocation and network
traffic management, showcasing its capability to optimize
system performance amidst the fluctuating nature of wire-
less communications. With its predictive modeling capabil-
ities and remarkable sampling efficiency, MBRL is adept
at navigating environments with variable factors [38], [55].
To address computational constraints and wireless channel
volatility, our research draws inspiration from MBRL and
develops a computation-efficient reward surrogate model to
optimize LLM deployment at the edge.
III. SYSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM FORMULATION
In this section, we begin with a comprehensive description
of the system model, which highlights the deployment of a
splitting LLM across wireless network. Afterward, we discuss
the impact of the layer splitting point on LLM performance
under various channel conditions. Finally, we formulate the
3
TABLE I: Summary and comparison of related works
Refs
Brief description
Limitations
[22]
Discusses the deployment of LLMs at 6G edges, advo-
cating for edge computing to optimize LLM deployment.
Lacks detailed methodologies for handling computa-
tional constraints at edge nodes.
[41]
Introduces split learning, which splits models between
clients and servers to avoid transferring raw data.
Focuses on DNNs without considering the unique chal-
lenges of wireless channels and high deployment costs
associated with LLMs.
[26]
Explores split inference in wireless networks, distributing
DNNs for collaborative inference.
Does not account for the specific challenges of LLMs,
such as high computational requirements and the impact
of wireless channel volatility on performance.
[39]
Investigates model-based machine learning for communi-
cation systems, emphasizing the advantages of predictive
modeling in dynamic environments.
Limited focus on LLMs and their unique characteristics,
including high processing demands and sensitivity to
channel noise.
channel-aware splitting point optimization problem to balance
the UE computational load and LLM inference performance.
Beforehand, we summarize the mainly used notations in
Table II.
TABLE II: Notations used in the paper.
Notation
Definition
L
Total number of layers in the LLM
p
Adjustable splitting point, indicat-
ing the number of layers deployed
at the UE
LU(·), LC(·)
Layers deployed on UE and edge
respectively
x ∈Rdin
Input data
y, ˆy ∈Rdmid
Intermediate tensor before and af-
ter the channel
θUE, θedge
Parameters of the LLM layers de-
ployed on the UE and edge
h
Nakagami-m fading channel gain
m
Nakagami-m fading channel shape
parameter
Ω
Nakagami-m
fading
channel
spread parameter
n ∼N(0, σ2) Gaussian
distributed
noise
with
mean 0 and variance σ2
hth
Threshold for channel gain below
which packet loss occurs
P
Probability of packet loss
z ∈Rdout
Inference output provided by the
edge
θsurr
Parameters of the reward surrogate
model
A. System Model
To characterize the LLM provisioning with model splitting,
we primarily consider a system model illustrated in Fig. 2.
Without loss of generality, we assume that for an L-layer
LLM, the first p layers LU(·) are deployed at the UE, and
the remaining L −p layers LC(·) are in the edge, where
the splitting point p is adjustable. Based on this, for an input
x ∈Rdin, typically a sequence of text tokens, a UE transforms
x into a higher-dimensional intermediate tensor y ∈Rdmid, that
is,
y = LU(x; θUE),
(1)
where θUE denotes the parameters of layers in LU(·). This
procedure inevitably incurs a certain computational load on
UEs, typically measured in floating-point operations per sec-
ond (FLOPs). Typically, for the layer 1 with an input sequence
of length din and hidden dimension dmid, utilizing a multi-head
self-attention mechanism with κ heads, the computations for
the involved multi-head attention mechanism and feed-forward
network components can be obtained as FLOPs(L1)
=
3dind2
mid
κ
+ 2d2
indmid
κ
+ 9dind2
mid. Thus, the computational load on
the UE can be approximated as
CUE(p) =
p
X
i=1
FLOPs(Li)
= p ·
 3dind2
mid
κ
+ 2d2
indmid
κ
+ 9dind2
mid

.
(2)
The intermediate tensor y is transmitted from the UE to the
edge over a wireless communication channel. Mathematically,
the received signal ˆy ∈Rdmid after a Nakagami-m fading
channel [56], [57] can be represented as
ˆy = h · y + n,
(3)
where h ∼Nakagami(m, Ω) represents the Nakagami-m
fading with shape parameter m and spread parameter Ω,
and n ∼N(0, σ2) represents the noise following a normal
distribution with zero mean and variance σ2. In our simulation,
each element of the intermediate tensor is independently
subjected to a packet loss probability, abstracting each element
as a separate packet to capture the impact of noise at a
granular level. When h = 1, it degenerates to an additive white
Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. The probability density
function (PDF) of the Nakagami-m distribution for the channel
4
1
2
3
4
Request 
Input 
···
4
5
32
Inference 
Output 
3
UE
Edge / Cloud
Output of layer 3
Whole LLM
1    2    3         4    5            32
Wireless 
Channel
···
LLM splitting point(s)
x
y
ˆy
U
L
C
L
z
x : Input data
U
L : LLM layers deployed at
  the UE
y : Intermediate tensor
ˆy : Noisy intermediate tensor
C
L : LLM layers deployed at
  the edge node/cloud
: Final output
z
h : Nakagami-m fading      
  channel gain
n : AWGN
n
h
Fig. 2: Overview of the split model architecture in wireless channel, with layer 3 designated as the example splitting point.
We use the 32-layer LLaMA2-7B model as an example.
gain h is given by:
f(h) = 2mmh2m−1
Γ(m)Ωm e−mh2
Ω,
(4)
where Γ(m) denotes the Gamma function. The shape param-
eter m controls the severity of fading. When m = 1, the
Nakagami-m distribution degenerates to a Rayleigh fading
channel; at lower values of m, the channel experiences more
severe fading, leading to greater variability in noise levels. In
practical scenarios, particularly when splitting LLMs between
UE and base stations, the mobile nature of devices often leads
to rapidly changing channel conditions. For instance, as a user
moves from an open outdoor area into a building or dense
urban environment, the shape parameter m in the Nakagami-m
distribution would decrease, reflecting more severe multipath
fading and greater noise intensity fluctuations. This dynamic
environment necessitates continuous adaptation of the splitting
strategy to maintain inference performance under varying
noise conditions.
Besides, when the channel gain h falls below a certain
threshold hth, the lower signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and rela-
tively higher bit error rate (BER) imply retransmission, thus
exceeding the latency requirement in quality of service (QoS)
with a rather high probability. Hence, such a case can be
regarded as a packet loss. Accordingly, recalling the formula
of Nakagami-m distribution, the probability of packet loss can
be expressed as
P(Packet Loss) = P(h < hth)
=
Z hth
0
2mmh2m−1
Γ(m)Ωm e−mh2
Ωdh.
(5)
Subsequently, the edge delivers an inference output z ∈Rdout
as
z = LC(ˆy; θedge).
(6)
The performance of the LLMs is commonly quantified using
the perplexity (PPL) metric, a standard means in NLP to eval-
uate how well a probability model predicts a sample. Given
an LLM and a sequence of N tokens (i.e., w1, w2, · · · , wN),
the PPL is defined as
PPL = exp
 
−1
N
N
X
k=1
log PLLM(wk|w1, w2, . . . , wk−1)
!
,
(7)
where PLLM(wk|w1, w2, . . . , wk−1) denotes the LLM’s pre-
diction probability from the previous k −1 tokens. A lower
PPL signifies superior model performance, demonstrating the
model’s proficiency in accurately predicting the subsequent
word in a sequence. Hence, in this context, PPL can serve as
a unified metric to assess the impact of channel impairments
on the LLM’s ability.
B. Problem Formulation
Beforehand, we investigate the impact of splitting points on
the inference performance under different channel conditions
and present the corresponding simulation results regarding
several mainstream open-source LLMs, including LLaMA2-
7B, LLaMA2-13B [5], Mistral-7B [58], Aya-23-8B [59],
Openchat-8B [60], and Prem-1B [61], in Fig. 3. Consistent
with our intuition, it can be observed from Fig. 3 that for
the same settings, a lower SNR or larger packet loss rate
generally yields inferior performance (i.e., larger PPL). More
interestingly, an earlier model splitting (i.e., a smaller p)
could worsen the inference performance while the channel
conditions significantly affect the performance of a given
splitting point. Such an observation is also consistent with
the widely recognized fact that earlier layers in LLM are
responsible for learning the general or basic features of the
training dataset [62]. These findings underscore the impor-
tance of strategically selecting the splitting point in the LLM
architecture to maintain desired performance.
On the other hand, high computational load on UEs would
lead to increased latency and energy consumption, further
undermining the benefits of deploying LLMs in edge envi-
ronments. As indicated in (2), the computational load on the
UE is approximately proportional to the number of layers
processed locally. This proportionality yields a contradicting
phenomenon that an earlier model splitting worsens the in-
ference performance but ameliorates the computational cost
at the computation-limited UE. In other words, in order to
5
LLaMA2-7B
Aya-23-8B
Openchat-8B
LLaMA2-13B
Prem-1B
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Mistral-7B
Fig. 3: Illustrations of the impact on PPL across different layers for various LLMs under (a) high SNR and (b) low SNR in
AWGN; (c) low packet loss probability and (d) high packet loss probability under Nakagami-m fading.
6
minimize the overall system PPL while effectively balancing
the computational load on the UE, the problem turns to
identifying the optimal splitting point p under volatile channel
conditions, that is,
p∗= arg min
p [PPL(p; σ, m) + λ · CUE(p)] ,
(8)
where PPL(p; σ, m) quantifies the LLM’p inference perfor-
mance, taking into account the splitting point p, the noise
intensity σ, and the Nakagami-m fading shape parameter m,
which directly affects the packet loss probability. Besides,
the weight λ balances the trade-off between the inference
performance and computational load.
Considering the variability of network conditions and the
complexities of real-time decision-making in distributed sys-
tems, we reformulate this optimization problem as a sequential
decision-making task. In that regard, RL is particularly well-
suited for this scenario, due to its capability to adapt to the
evolving environment and optimize decisions accordingly.
IV. REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FOR SPLITTING POINT
OPTIMIZATION
In this section, we investigate the application of RL to
dynamically optimize the splitting point of LLMs across UE
and edge computing resources, thus adaptively responding to
channel variations.
A. The Markov Decision Process
The splitting point adjustment under volatile channels can
be formalized as a Markov Decision Process (MDP), consist-
ing of a tuple ⟨S, A, P, R⟩. In particular, as illustrated in Fig. 4,
the state space S encompasses the key factors such as the noise
intensity σ, the Nakagami-m fading shape m and the current
splitting point p, namely, s = {σ, m, p} ∈S. The action space
A is designed to accommodate a range of possible adjustments
to the splitting point, allowing for both fine-grained and more
substantial modifications. Specifically, A includes actions such
as moving the splitting point upward or downward by u
layers, where u can take values such as 1, 2, 3, and so
forth, or maintaining the current position. Mathematically, this
can be expressed as a ∈A = {−u, . . . , −1, 0, +1, . . . , +u}.
This generalized action space provides the RL agent with the
flexibility to optimize the splitting strategy dynamically in
response to varying channel environments. For a time-step t,
given an action at under state st, the environment state will
transit to the next state st+1 following the transition probability
P, which is contingent on the selected action and real-time
channel conditions. Meanwhile, a reward can be obtained as
rt = R(st, at) = −
 PPL(st+1) + λ · CUE(st+1)

.
(9)
Finally, the long-term overall objective can be formalized
as
J(θ) = Eπθ
h
T
X
t=1
γt · rt
i
= Eπθ
h
T
X
t=1
γt · R(st, at)
i
= Eπθ
h
−
T
X
t=1
γt ·
 PPL(st+1) + λ · CUE(st+1)
i
,
(10)
where the discount factor γ involves the significance of future
rewards. Correspondingly, it requires learning a policy πθ
parameterized by θ to attain the maximum of (10).
B. Proximal Policy Optimization
For dynamically adjusting the splitting point of LLMs
within cloud-edge-UE networks, we employ the PPO algo-
rithm [42] to iteratively learn the policy πθ. Specifically,
PPO utilizes two neural networks, namely, the policy network
πθ(a|s) and the value function network Vϕ(s), which are
parameterized by θ and ϕ respectively, to dictate the action
a given the state s and estimate the expected discounted
return from state s. Notably, PPO leverages a clipped surro-
gate objective function LCLIP(θ), which approximates the true
objective J(θ) but introduces a clipping mechanism to limit
the magnitude of policy updates. Mathematically, the clipped
objective can be written as
LCLIP(θ) = Et
"
min
 πθ(at|st)
πθold(at|st)
ˆAt,
(11)
clip
 πθ(at|st)
πθold(at|st), 1 −ϵ, 1 + ϵ

ˆAt
 #
,
where θold represents the policy parameters for sampling. The
clipping mechanism clip(·) ensures that the policy ratio
πθ(at|st)
πθold(at|st) does not deviate significantly from 1, thus prevent-
ing large, destabilizing updates. This mechanism is critical in
RL scenarios where stability and reliability are paramount,
especially in dynamically changing environments like cloud-
edge-UE networks. The advantage estimate ˆAt, which can be
computed using generalized advantage estimation (GAE), is
formulated as
ˆAt =
∞
X
l=0
(γξ)lδt+l,
(12)
where δt = rt + γVϕ(st+1) −Vϕ(st) denotes the temporal
difference error, γ is the discount factor, and ξ is the GAE
parameter controlling the bias-variance tradeoff.
The update to the policy parameters θ is performed using a
gradient ascent step on the clipped objective function LCLIP(θ).
Mathematically,
θ ←θ + α∇θLCLIP(θ).
(13)
This gradient ascent step ensures that the policy is updated
iteratively to maximize the expected reward while maintaining
stability through the clipping mechanism.
During the training process, we employ an experience replay
mechanism specifically adapted to the dynamic nature of the
channel conditions in our scenario. Notably, state-action pairs,
including the current splitting point p, noise intensity σ, and
channel fading characteristics m, are stored in a replay buffer.
At each training step, a mini-batch of these pairs is sampled
from the replay buffer to update the policy network, ensuring
that the model learns from a diverse set of past experiences
under varying network conditions. This technique helps to
break the temporal correlations inherent in sequential channel
variations, leading to more stable learning.
7
Channel 
noise
···
RL agent
Evaluate 
Dataset 
LLM
State Space
· Noise Intensity (   )
· Nakagami-m fading shape (   )
· Split Point (p)
State Input
Reward Function
Action Space
Move Up   |   Move Down   |   Maintain Current Split Point
Reward
Policy Network
  
Receives state inputs and 
computes action 
probabilities.
 
Updates policy based on 
rewards.
Action Selection
State
Action
Reward
Split point
m

1
UE
1
( ,
)
PPL(
)
(
)
(
)
t
t
t
t
R s a
s
C
s






Fig. 4: Illustrations of the RL setup, including the LLM, RL agent, and channel noise modules. The RL agent optimizes the
splitting point of the LLM by receiving state inputs (noise intensity, Nakagami-m fading shape and splitting point), computing
action probabilities via the policy network, and updating the policy based on the reward function.
C. The Reward Surrogate Model for Faster RL
The integration of MBRL into our LLM split optimization
scenario significantly enhances the efficiency and effectiveness
of our RL approach. Nevertheless, the slow reasoning capa-
bility of LLM makes the learning process sluggish. Therefore,
inspired by the classical MBRL, which uses a predictive model
to simulate the environment, we adopt a surrogate model to
approximate the reward function, thereby boosting the learning
efficiency. Specifically, we approximate the PPL(p; σ, m) that
needs to be computed by running LLM, and computes a DNN-
based surrogate model g
PPL(p; σ, m, θsurr) parameterized by
θsurr to minimize the mean squared error (MSE) as
MSE = E
h PPL(p; σ, m) −g
PPL(p; σ, m, θsurr)
2i
.
(14)
Notably, we use cross-validation [63] to prevent overfitting and
ensure the generalizability of the surrogate model.
Incorporating the surrogate model directly into the reward
calculation, the reward at time step t can be redefined as:
˜R(st, at) = −

g
PPL(pt; σt, mt, θsurr) + λ · CUE(pt)

,
(15)
where g
PPL(pt; σt, mt, θsurr) represents the estimated PPL pro-
vided by the surrogate model. This reformulation significantly
reduces the training burden by replacing the direct LLM
inference with an efficient approximation, enabling more rapid
policy evaluation and iteration of an RL policy. From a
theoretical standpoint [64], the surrogate model effectively
reduces the variance in reward estimation by providing a
smoothed approximation of the true reward landscape. This
smoothing is particularly advantageous in high-dimensional
action spaces, where small perturbations in actions could lead
to large fluctuations in PPL if calculated directly.
Correspondingly, during the training process of RL, ˆAt in
(12) can be re-written as
ˆAt =
∞
X
l=0
(γξ)lh g
PPL(st+1+l) + λ · CUE(st+1+l)

+ γV (st+2+l) −V (st+1+l)
i
.
(16)
On this basis, we can compute LCLIP(θ), which consequently
facilitates the update of θ.
By incorporating this model-based approach, as shown
in Table IV, we achieve substantial gains in computational
efficiency, enabling the RL agent to flexibly accommodate
changing deployment environments.
Finally, we summarize the algorithm in Algorithm 1.
V. SIMULATION SETTINGS AND EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Experimental Setup
To validate the effectiveness of RL-based adaptive LLM
splitting point determination, we use the LLaMA2-7B model
[5], a 32-layer LLM, as well as the WikiText-2 dataset [65],
which contains 4, 355 sentences with an average length of
20 words, to evaluate the PPL under varied network condi-
tions. Particularly, we simulate a changing, fading-induced
packet loss probability in the range between 0 and 0.3.
Moreover, we primarily consider three representative cases:
• Case L: A low packet loss probability 0 ∼0.1 and an
initial splitting point pinitL near the input (layers 1-5).
• Case H: A high packet loss probability 0.1 ∼0.3 and
an initial splitting point pinitH far from the input (layers
6-10).
• Case A: Complete range of packet loss probability 0 ∼
0.3 and initial splitting points pinitA (layers 1-10).
Besides, the default hyperparameters for the PPO [42] algo-
rithm and the channels are given in Table III.
To reduce the computational cost of evaluating the LLM’s
performance at each step, by collecting 9, 718 pieces of
practical records, we derive a reward surrogate model as in
Section IV-C. Our result shows that an MLP (Multi-Layer
8
(a) Case L
(b) Case H
(c) Case A
Fig. 5: Comparison of training performances for different RL approaches under Case L, Case H, and Case A.
TABLE III: PPO Algorithm Hyperparameters
Hyperparameter
Value
Learning rate (α)
0.0003
Discount factor (γ)
0.99
Clipping parameter (ϵ)
0.2
Update frequency (nstep)
400
Batch size
100
Steps per episode
5
GAE (ξ)
0.95
Perceptron) yields a test loss of 0.00548 in MSE and 0.050 in
mean absolute error (MAE), thus providing sufficient accuracy.
Therefore, we use this MLP-based reward surrogate model to
accelerate the evaluation process.
B. Experiment Results
We first present the performance of PPO with and without
the reward surrogate model and compare them with baseline
RL schemes (i.e., A2C [66] and DQN [33]). Fig. 5 presents
the corresponding results. It can be observed from Fig. 5 that
for Case H and Case A, PPO yields significantly superior
performance than A2C and DQN; while for Case L, all RL
approaches lead to similar performance. Besides, PPO trained
with reward surrogate models closely resemble that with actual
rewards. Furthermore, Table IV compares PPO with and with-
out reward surrogate model under Case A in terms of reward,
training duration, and computational resource consumption.
The results indicate that the reward surrogate model signif-
icantly reduces the training time and computational resource
consumption while achieving comparable rewards.
Fig. 6 presents a violin plot comparing the reward distribu-
tions of four different strategies: the trained PPO agent with
true reward training, the trained PPO agent using the reward
surrogate model, a random policy, and an untrained PPO agent.
The plot shows that the trained agents, both standard and
MBRL-enhanced, lead to higher average rewards and tighter
Fig. 6: This violin plot compares the reward distributions
across four different strategies. The width of each violin
represents the density of rewards at different values, with wider
sections indicating a higher probability of observing rewards
in that range. The central white dot represents the median
reward, while the thick black bar in the center denotes the
interquartile range (IQR).
Fig. 7: splitting points determined by the trained PPO agent
across different noise intensities, along with a LOESS trend
line.
9
TABLE IV: Performance comparison of PPO with and without reward surrogate model under Case A.
Metric
w.o. surrogate w. surrogate
Reward at 24, 000 Steps
2.9736
2.9663
Training Duration
> 24 days
7.7 minutes
Computational Resource Consumption
16.3 GB
< 1 GB
Algorithm 1 PPO with Reward Surrogate Model for Adaptive
Splitting Point Determination in Wireless LLM Inference.
1: Initialize policy network parameters θ, value function
network parameters ϕ.
2: Initialize learning rate α, discount factor γ, GAE param-
eter ξ, clipping threshold ϵ.
3: Initialize surrogate model parameters θsurr.
4: Initialize replay buffer D.
5: Initialize flag USE SURROGATE ←False.
6: Initialize EPOCH COUNTER ←0.
7: Set threshold T for starting surrogate model training.
8: for each training epoch do
9:
EPOCH COUNTER ←EPOCH COUNTER + 1
10:
for each interaction step t do
11:
Observe state st.
12:
Select action at according to πθ(·|st).
13:
Execute action at and obtain reward rt. The environ-
ment transits to state st+1.
14:
if USE SURROGATE then
15:
Store transition (st, at, st+1) in replay buffer D.
16:
else
17:
Store transition (st, at, rt, st+1) in replay buffer D.
18:
end if
19:
end for
20:
Sample a mini-batch of transitions Φ ∼D.
21:
for each transition in mini-batch do
22:
if USE SURROGATE then
23:
Compute surrogate reward g
PPL(st+1).
24:
Update advantage estimate ˆAt using surrogate re-
ward with (16).
25:
else
26:
Compute advantage estimate ˆAt using GAE from
(12).
27:
end if
28:
Compute clipped surrogate objective LCLIP(θ) with
(11).
29:
Perform gradient ascent on LCLIP(θ) with (13).
30:
end for
31:
if not USE SURROGATE and
EPOCH COUNTER ≥T then
32:
Train surrogate model g
PPL(p; σ, m, θsurr) to minimize
MSE with (14).
33:
Set USE SURROGATE ←True.
34:
end if
35: end for
Fig. 8: Comparison of training performances across different
action spaces (Action Space = 3, 5, 7) for varying movement
ranges.
reward distribution, indicating more consistent and superior
performance compared to the random and untrained agents.
Fig. 7 illustrates 500 splitting points determined by the
trained PPO agent under Case A, and complements a lo-
cally estimated scatterplot smoothing (LOESS) [67] trend
line, whose slope and R-squared value provide quantitative
insights into the relationship between channel conditions and
splitting point decisions. It can be observed from Fig. 7 that
as noise intensity σ increases, the agent prefers to place the
splitting point further from the input layers. This strategic
adjustment helps mitigate the adverse effects of noise on model
performance by leveraging the cloud’s more robust processing
capabilities.
In addition to the baseline experiment where the action
space is limited to single-layer adjustments, we conduct further
experiments with enlarged action space to evaluate the impact
of larger adjustments on the training process and final rewards.
As shown in Fig. 8, allowing larger adjustments (e.g., moving
by 2, 3 layers) leads to slower convergence but ultimately
achieves higher rewards. This trade-off suggests that while the
larger action space can explore a wider range of configurations,
they may require more training steps to stabilize. However,
in both experimental and practical scenarios, single-layer ad-
justments offer notable advantages. They provide fine-grained
control over the splitting point, allowing the model to quickly
adapt to changes in channel conditions. This is particularly
beneficial in dynamic environments where frequent and subtle
adjustments are necessary to maintain optimal performance.
The impact of various hyperparameter settings on PPO
10
Fig. 9: Impact of various hyperparameters with respect to training steps in the PPO algorithm, including comparisons of learning
rate α, batch size B, clip range ϵ, and GAE parameter ξ.
training performance is analyzed in Fig. 9. Fig. 9(a) indicates
that higher learning rates (α = 0.0005 and α = 0.0007) lead
to faster initial learning but may introduce higher variance
in the rewards. Fig. 9(b) demonstrates that larger batch sizes
(B = 150 and B = 200) generally result in smoother and
more stable reward curves, yielding better gradient estimates.
Fig. 9(c) reveals that moderate clip ranges (ϵ=0.2 and ϵ=0.3)
strike a balance between stability and performance, whereas
too small or too large clip ranges can degrade performance.
Fig. 9(d) presents that a larger GAE parameter (ξ=0.99)
produces more impressive long-term reward accumulation,
emphasizing the importance of temporal smoothing in advan-
tage estimation.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
In this paper, we have presented an MBRL framework for
dynamically optimizing the splitting point of LLMs deployed
across UE and the edge, so as to enhance the efficiency
and performance of LLMs under wireless network conditions.
In particular, we have formulated the problem as an MDP,
and introduced a reward surrogate model to significantly
shorten overall training time. The experimental results have
demonstrated the framework’s efficacy in managing the trade-
off between inference performance and computational load at
the UE. Meanwhile, comprehensive validations in mainstream
open-source LLMs have clearly demonstrated that an earlier
model splitting could worsen the point inference performance,
which might provide an independent interest to the community.
Our proposed framework offers a structured approach to
dynamically deploying LLMs across heterogeneous devices.
In practical applications, such as in smart cities and industrial
IoT, this framework can enhance the flexibility of LLM
deployment while alleviating the computational constraints
associated with running LLMs on edge devices.
Despite these achievements, several limitations and chal-
lenges remain. Though the validation of the impact of splitting
points on the performance of some widely adopted LLMs,
given the versatility of LLMs, the generality issue still awakens
further attention. The lack of a more accurate channel model
and the absence of communication-efficient distribution learn-
ing approaches (e.g., quantization) in data transmission also
demands future research. Also, future research could explore
adaptive mechanisms that dynamically adjust the action space
based on the current learning phase or environmental condi-
tions, thereby balancing the need for quick convergence and
high reward attainment. Additionally, further investigation is
required into the scalability of our framework in larger, more
complex network environments and its generalization across
11
different LLM architectures. We will explore these important
directions in the future.
REFERENCES
[1] OpenAI, “GPT-4 technical report,” OpenAI, 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://cdn.openai.com/papers/gpt-4.pdf
[2] G. Team, R. Anil, S. Borgeaud, Y. Wu, J.-B. Alayrac, J. Yu, R. Soricut,
J. Schalkwyk, A. M. Dai, A. Hauth et al., “Gemini: a family of highly
capable multimodal models,” 2023.
[3] T. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. D. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal,
A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam, G. Sastry, A. Askell et al., “Language models
are few-shot learners,” Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 1877–1901, 2020.
[4] Y. Bai, A. Jones, K. Ndousse, A. Askell, A. Chen, N. DasSarma,
D. Drain, S. Fort, D. Ganguli, T. Henighan et al., “Training a helpful and
harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback,”
2022.
[5] H. Touvron, L. Martin, K. Stone, P. Albert, A. Almahairi, Y. Babaei,
N. Bashlykov, S. Batra, P. Bhargava, S. Bhosale et al., “LLaMA 2: Open
foundation and fine-tuned chat models,” 2023.
[6] J. Wei, M. Bosma, V. Y. Zhao, K. Guu, A. W. Yu, B. Lester, N. Du,
A. M. Dai, and Q. V. Le, “Finetuned language models are zero-shot
learners,” 2021.
[7] T. Le Scao, A. Fan, C. Akiki, E. Pavlick, S. Ili´c, D. Hesslow,
R. Castagn´e, A. S. Luccioni, F. Yvon, M. Gall´e et al., “Bloomloom:
A 176b-pb-parameter open-access multilingual language model,” 2022.
[8] E. Nijkamp, B. Pang, H. Hayashi, L. Tu, H. Wang, Y. Zhou, S. Savarese,
and C. Xiong, “Codegen: An open large language model for code with
multi-turn program synthesis,” 2022.
[9] T. Webb, K. J. Holyoak, and H. Lu, “Emergent analogical reasoning
in large language models,” Nature Human Behaviour, vol. 7, no. 9, pp.
1526–1541, 2023.
[10] M. Jin, Q. Yu, C. Zhang, D. Shu, S. Zhu, M. Du, Y. Zhang, and
Y. Meng, “Health-LLM: Personalized retrieval-augmented disease pre-
diction model,” 2024.
[11] B. Roziere, J. Gehring, F. Gloeckle, S. Sootla, I. Gat, X. E. Tan, Y. Adi,
J. Liu, T. Remez, J. Rapin et al., “Code llama: Open foundation models
for code,” 2023.
[12] A. J. Thirunavukarasu, D. S. J. Ting, K. Elangovan, L. Gutierrez, T. F.
Tan, and D. S. W. Ting, “Large language models in medicine,” Nature
Medicine, vol. 29, no. 8, pp. 1930–1940, 2023.
[13] S. Wu, O. Irsoy, S. Lu, V. Dabravolski, M. Dredze, S. Gehrmann,
P. Kambadur, D. Rosenberg, and G. Mann, “BloombergGPT: A large
language model for finance,” 2023.
[14] J. Kaddour, J. Harris, M. Mozes, H. Bradley, R. Raileanu, and
R. McHardy, “Challenges and applications of large language models,”
2023.
[15] Y. Mao, C. You, J. Zhang, K. Huang, and K. B. Letaief, “A survey
on mobile edge computing: The communication perspective,” IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 2322–2358,
2017.
[16] P. Mach and Z. Becvar, “Mobile edge computing: A survey on archi-
tecture and computation offloading,” IEEE Communications Surveys &
Tutorials, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 1628–1656, 2017.
[17] E. Li, L. Zeng, Z. Zhou, and X. Chen, “Edge AI: On-demand ac-
celerating deep neural network inference via edge computing,” IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 447–457,
2019.
[18] K. B. Letaief, Y. Shi, J. Lu, and J. Lu, “Edge artificial intelligence for
6G: Vision, enabling technologies, and applications,” IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 5–36, 2021.
[19] N. Abbas, Y. Zhang, A. Taherkordi, and T. Skeie, “Mobile edge
computing: A survey,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 5, no. 1,
pp. 450–465, 2018.
[20] Q.-V. Pham, F. Fang, V. N. Ha, M. J. Piran, M. Le, L. B. Le, W.-J.
Hwang, and Z. Ding, “A survey of multi-access edge computing in 5G
and beyond: Fundamentals, technology integration, and state-of-the-art,”
IEEE Access, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 116 974–117 017, 2020.
[21] Y. Chen, R. Li, Z. Zhao, C. Peng, J. Wu, E. Hossain, and H. Zhang,
“NetGPT: An AI-native network architecture for provisioning beyond
personalized generative services,” IEEE Network, March 2024, early
Access.
[22] Z. Lin, G. Qu, Q. Chen, X. Chen, Z. Chen, and K. Huang, “Pushing large
language models to the 6G edge: Vision, challenges, and opportunities,”
2024.
[23] R. Patil and V. Gudivada, “A review of current trends, techniques, and
challenges in large language models (llms),” Applied Sciences, vol. 14,
no. 5, p. 2074, 2024.
[24] M. U. Hadi, q. a. tashi, R. Qureshi, A. Shah, a. muneer, M. Irfan,
A. Zafar, M. B. Shaikh, N. Akhtar, J. Wu, and S. Mirjalili, “A survey
on large language models: applications, challenges, limitations, and
practical usage,” 2023.
[25] Z. Lin, G. Qu, X. Chen, and K. Huang, “Split learning in 6G edge
networks,” 2024.
[26] J. Lee, H. Lee, and W. Choi, “Wireless channel adaptive DNN split
inference for resource-constrained edge devices,” IEEE Communications
Letters, vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 1520–1524, 2023.
[27] L. Qiao and Y. Zhou, “Timely split inference in wireless networks: An
accuracy-freshness tradeoff,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technol-
ogy, vol. 72, no. 12, pp. 16 817–16 822, 2023.
[28] M. Chen, D. G¨und¨uz, K. Huang, W. Saad, M. Bennis, A. V. Feljan,
and H. V. Poor, “Distributed learning in wireless networks: Recent
progress and future challenges,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, vol. 39, no. 12, pp. 3579–3605, 2021.
[29] J. Ryu, D. Won, and Y. Lee, “A study of split learning model.” in
IMCOM, 2022, pp. 1–4.
[30] Q. Lan, Q. Zeng, P. Popovski, D. G¨und¨uz, and K. Huang, “Progressive
feature transmission for split inference at the wireless edge,” 2021.
[31] J. Karjee, P. Naik, K. Anand, and V. N. Bhargav, “Split computing: DNN
inference partition with load balancing in IoT-edge platform for beyond
5G,” Measurement: Sensors, vol. 23, no. 1, p. 100409, 2022.
[32] Y. Wang, K. Guo, W. Hong, Q. Mu, and Z. Zhao, “Split learning in
wireless networks: A communication and computation adaptive scheme,”
in 2023 IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in
China (ICCC).
IEEE, 2023, pp. 1–6.
[33] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu, J. Veness, M. G.
Bellemare, A. Graves, M. Riedmiller, A. K. Fidjeland, G. Ostrovski
et al., “Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning,”
Nature, vol. 518, no. 7540, pp. 529–533, 2015.
[34] Y. Li, “Deep reinforcement learning: An overview,” 2017.
[35] N. C. Luong, D. T. Hoang, S. Gong, D. Niyato, P. Wang, Y.-C.
Liang, and D. I. Kim, “Applications of deep reinforcement learning
in communications and networking: A survey,” IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 3133–3174, 2019.
[36] Y. Qian, J. Wu, R. Wang, F. Zhu, and W. Zhang, “Survey on rein-
forcement learning applications in communication networks,” Journal
of Communications and Information Networks, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 30–39,
2019.
[37] M. Deisenroth and C. E. Rasmussen, “Pilco: A model-based and
data-efficient approach to policy search,” in Proceedings of the 28th
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-11), 2011, pp.
465–472.
[38] L. Kaiser, M. Babaeizadeh, P. Milos, B. Osinski, R. H. Campbell,
K. Czechowski, D. Erhan, C. Finn, P. Kozakowski, S. Levine et al.,
“Model-based reinforcement learning for Atari,” 2019.
[39] N. Shlezinger, N. Farsad, Y. C. Eldar, and A. J. Goldsmith, “Model-
based machine learning for communications,” 2021.
[40] T. M. Moerland, J. Broekens, A. Plaat, C. M. Jonker et al., “Model-
based reinforcement learning: A survey,” Foundations and Trends® in
Machine Learning, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 1–118, 2023.
[41] O. Gupta and R. Raskar, “Distributed learning of deep neural network
over multiple agents,” Journal of Network and Computer Applications,
vol. 116, no. 1, pp. 1–8, 2018.
[42] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov,
“Proximal policy optimization algorithms,” 2017.
[43] B. Lin, T. Peng, C. Zhang, M. Sun, L. Li, H. Zhao, W. Xiao, Q. Xu,
X. Qiu, S. Li et al., “Infinite-LLM: Efficient LLM service for long
context with distattention and distributed kvcache,” 2024.
[44] L. Chen, N. K. Ahmed, A. Dutta, A. Bhattacharjee, S. Yu, Q. I. Mahmud,
W. Abebe, H. Phan, A. Sarkar, B. Butler et al., “Position paper: The
landscape and challenges of HPC research and LLMs,” 2024.
[45] M. Satyanarayanan, P. Bahl, R. Caceres, and N. Davies, “The case for
vm-based cloudlets in mobile computing,” IEEE Pervasive Computing,
vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 14–23, 2009.
[46] Q. Dong, X. Chen, and M. Satyanarayanan, “Creating edge AI from
cloud-based LLMs,” in Proceedings of the 25th International Workshop
on Mobile Computing Systems and Applications, 2024, pp. 8–13, early
Access.
[47] M. Zhang, J. Cao, X. Shen, and Z. Cui, “Edgeshard: Efficient llm
inference via collaborative edge computing,” 2024.
12
[48] I.
Ong,
“Efficient
distributed
LLM
inference
with
dynamic
partitioning,”
California,
Berkeley,
Technical
Report
UCB/EECS-
2024-108, May 2024. [Online]. Available: http://www2.eecs.berkeley.
edu/Pubs/TechRpts/2024/EECS-2024-108.html
[49] L. Zhu, G. Takami, M. Kawahara, H. Kanokogi, and T. Matsubara, “Al-
leviating parameter-tuning burden in reinforcement learning for large-
scale process control,” Computers & Chemical Engineering, vol. 158,
no. 1, p. 107658, 2022.
[50] R. T. Icarte, T. Q. Klassen, R. Valenzano, M. P. Castro, E. Waldie,
and S. A. McIlraith, “Learning reward machines: A study in partially
observable reinforcement learning,” Artificial Intelligence, vol. 323,
no. 1, p. 103989, 2023.
[51] K. Yang, C. Shen, J. Yang, S.-p. Yeh, and J. Sydir, “Offline reinforcement
learning for wireless network optimization with mixture datasets,” 2023.
[52] C.-H. Ke and L. Astuti, “Applying multi-agent deep reinforcement learn-
ing for contention window optimization to enhance wireless network
performance,” ICT Express, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 776–782, 2023.
[53] D. Liu, C. Sun, C. Yang, and L. Hanzo, “Optimizing wireless systems
using unsupervised and reinforced-unsupervised deep learning,” IEEE
Network, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 270–277, 2020.
[54] X. Li, L. Lu, W. Ni, A. Jamalipour, D. Zhang, and H. Du, “Feder-
ated multi-agent deep reinforcement learning for resource allocation
of vehicle-to-vehicle communications,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, vol. 71, no. 8, pp. 8810–8824, 2022.
[55] V. Egorov and A. Shpilman, “Scalable multi-agent model-based rein-
forcement learning,” 2022.
[56] M. Nakagami, The m-Distribution—A General Formula of Intensity
Distribution of Rapid Fading.
Oxford: Pergamon, 1960, pp. 3–36.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B9780080093062500054
[57] N. Beaulieu and C. Cheng, “Efficient Nakagami-m fading channel
simulation,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 54, no. 2,
pp. 413–424, 2005.
[58] A. Q. Jiang, A. Sablayrolles, A. Mensch, C. Bamford, D. S. Chaplot,
D. d. l. Casas, F. Bressand, G. Lengyel, G. Lample, L. Saulnier et al.,
“Mistral 7B,” 2023.
[59] A. ¨Ust¨un, V. Aryabumi, Z.-X. Yong, W.-Y. Ko, D. D’souza, G. Onilude,
N. Bhandari, S. Singh, H.-L. Ooi, A. Kayid et al., “Aya model: An
instruction finetuned open-access multilingual language model,” 2024.
[60] G. Wang, S. Cheng, X. Zhan, X. Li, S. Song, and Y. Liu, “Openchat:
Advancing open-source language models with mixed-quality data,”
2023.
[61] R. Gupta and N. Sosio, “Introducing Prem-1B,” PremAI, 2024.
[Online]. Available: https://blog.premai.io/introducing-prem-1b/
[62] X. Zhang, B. Yu, H. Yu, Y. Lv, T. Liu, F. Huang, H. Xu, and Y. Li,
“Wider and deeper LLM networks are fairer LLM evaluators,” 2023.
[63] M. Stone, “Cross-validatory choice and assessment of statistical predic-
tions,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodologi-
cal), vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 111–133, 1974.
[64] J. Romoff, P. Henderson, A. Pich´e, V. Francois-Lavet, and J. Pineau,
“Reward estimation for variance reduction in deep reinforcement learn-
ing,” 2018.
[65] S. Merity, C. Xiong, J. Bradbury, and R. Socher, “Pointer sentinel
mixture models,” 2016.
[66] V. Mnih, A. P. Badia, M. Mirza, A. Graves, T. P. Lillicrap,
T. Harley, D. Silver, and K. Kavukcuoglu, “Asynchronous methods for
deep reinforcement learning,” Proceedings of the 33rd International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 1928–1937,
2016. [Online]. Available: http://proceedings.mlr.press/v48/mnih16.html
[67] W. S. Cleveland, “Robust locally weighted regression and smoothing
scatterplots,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, vol. 74,
no. 368, pp. 829–836, 1979.
