1
Beyond Connectivity: An Open Architecture for
AI-RAN Convergence in 6G
Michele Polese, Niloofar Mohamadi, Salvatore D’Oro, Leonardo Bonati, Tommaso Melodia
Abstract—Data-intensive Artificial Intelligence (AI) ap-
plications at the network edge demand a fundamental
shift in Radio Access Network (RAN) design, from merely
consuming AI for network optimization, to actively en-
abling distributed AI workloads. This presents a significant
opportunity for network operators to monetize AI while
leveraging existing infrastructure. To realize this vision,
this article presents a novel converged O-RAN and AI-
RAN architecture for unified orchestration and manage-
ment of telecommunications and AI workloads on shared
infrastructure.
The proposed architecture extends the Open RAN prin-
ciples of modularity, disaggregation, and cloud-nativeness
to support heterogeneous AI deployments. We introduce
two key architectural innovations: (i) the AI-RAN Orches-
trator, which extends the O-RAN Service Management and
Orchestration (SMO) to enable integrated resource and
allocation across RAN and AI workloads; and (ii) AI-RAN
sites that provide distributed edge AI platforms with real-
time processing capabilities. The proposed architecture
enables flexible orchestration, meeting requirements for
managing heterogeneous workloads at different time scales
while maintaining open, standardized interfaces and multi-
vendor interoperability.
This paper has been submitted to IEEE for publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice.
I. INTRODUCTION
5G-Advanced and 6G networks are reshaping the
role of the RAN, from a traditional communication
substrate to a programmable, intelligent, “sentient”, and
compute-capable platform. With emerging data-intensive
and latency-sensitive use cases such as Extended Reality
(XR), Integrated Sensing and Communications (ISAC),
and generative AI, there is an opportunity to rethink
M. Polese, L. Bonati, and T. Melodia are with the Institute for the
Wireless Internet of Things, Northeastern University, Boston, MA,
USA. E-mail: {m.polese, l.bonati, melodia}@northeastern.edu. N.
Mohamadi and S. D’Oro are with zTouch Networks, Inc. E-mail:
{niloofar.mohamadi, salvo}@ztouchnet.com
This article is based upon work partially supported by the NTIA
PWSCIF under Award No. 25-60-IF054, the U.S. NSF under award
CNS-2112471, and by OUSD(R&E) through Army Research Labora-
tory Cooperative Agreement Number W911NF-24-2-0065. The views
and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors
and should not be interpreted as representing the official policies,
either expressed or implied, of the Army Research Laboratory or the
U.S. Government. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce
and distribute reprints for Government purposes notwithstanding any
copyright notation herein.
RAN architecture not only as a consumer of AI for in-
ternal optimization, but also as a distributed platform for
hosting AI workloads [1]. This transformation demands
architectural innovation that supports the convergence of
communication and AI computing within the network
itself—simultaneously delivering connectivity and sup-
porting distributed AI inference and training demands.
This dual capability is a foundational principle of the
AI-RAN Alliance, a new telecom industry initiative
dedicated to transforming networks through pervasive AI
integration [2].
In this paper, we design network resource orchestra-
tion and deployment workflows to enable infrastructure
support for AI solutions (i) for the RAN, i.e., tasked with
improving efficiency and operations; or (ii) on the RAN,
i.e., leveraging the distributed compute infrastructure for
inference, sensing, or training at the edge. The network
infrastructure and orchestration abstraction layer sup-
ports flexibility, scalability, and interoperability to enable
innovative AI-native next-generation wireless systems.
At the same time, to enable innovation, this network
abstraction and the underlying infrastructure need to em-
brace openness, standardized interfaces, disaggregated
components and support for multi-vendor deployments.
In this area, the prior work focused on edge AI, open
architectures, and early results on AI and RAN orches-
tration. Preliminary efforts in edge AI deployment [3]
did not lead to a cohesive architectural framework that
can effectively manage the complex interplay between
AI workloads and RAN operations at scale. The O-
RAN ALLIANCE introduced intelligent control loops
to optimize RAN performance [4]. However, its archi-
tecture, with open, interoperable interfaces, a SMO and
the RAN Intelligent Controllers (RICs), does not support
generic AI workloads on a shared RAN infrastructure. As
discussed above, this is instead a focus area for the AI-
RAN Alliance. Recent literature has also addressed AI
and RAN orchestration [1, 5–8]. Specifically, [5] and [6]
discuss AI operations in the cloud, edge, and also RAN,
but do not propose an architecture for orchestration. [7]
proposes a converged AI-and-O-RAN architecture but
the end-to-end orchestrator only interacts with the Near-
RT RIC programmable logic units (xApps), thus limiting
the scope of services that can be managed and deployed.
[8] discusses AI-RAN AI operational workflows for AI-
arXiv:2507.06911v2  [cs.NI]  2 Dec 2025
Example 
Use Case
Near-RT RIC
Distributed AI-O-Cloud Infrastructure
E2
Near-RT RIC
AI-RAN Site
Compute
RU
CU-UP
CU-CP
DU
dApp
Container Orchestration
AI/ML  Container
AI/ML  Container
AI/ML  Container
AI-on-RAN
AI-for-RAN
AI-RAN Site
AI-RAN Site
AI-RAN Site
AI-RAN Site
Infrastructure
Network 
Functions
Orchestration
AI-SMO
AI Workload Interface 
Operator Policy 
Interface
RAN Workload Interface
Allocate Infrastructure Resources
Non-RT RIC
AI-RAN Orchestrator
RAN 
Workload 
Automation
Select Services
RAN
AI-for-RAN
AI-on-RAN
AI Workload 
Automation
Legend
• AI: XR video processing
• RAN: AI slicing
• 60/40 split
• Deploy in site 1
AI Devs
Deploy XR AI video 
processing at the edge
RAN Devs
Update RAN AI-based 
slicing model
Operator
Prioritize low-latency
RAN with spare compute for XR AI
Example
Fig. 1: Architecture enabling AI and RAN coexistence, integrated within the proposed extension of the O-RAN framework. The figure also
includes an example of use case for AI-and-RAN coexistence. An application developer submits an AI-on-RAN workload to enable XR
processing at the edge. In the meantime, a RAN vendor provides an updated AI-for-RAN slicing solution. The operator defines the policy
that the infrastructure should follow to enable both services. The AI-RAN orchestrator translates the policy into resource allocation, and
coordinates with the automation workflows to deploy the services in the AI-RAN sites.
RAN, but does not consider architectural elements. [1]
presents an infrastructure design that jointly supports
RAN and AI workloads, without considering AI-RAN
orchestration. Therefore, a comprehensive, end-to-end,
and generalized architecture enabling AI and RAN coex-
istence following O-RAN management and orchestration
principles is still missing.
Contributions. This paper takes a decisive step in this
direction by proposing a converged O-RAN and AI-RAN
architecture, where the O-RAN framework is extended
to support the orchestration and management of AI
workloads, as shown in Fig. 1. By building upon the
foundational principles of modularity, disaggregation,
and cloud-nativeness of the existing O-RAN architec-
ture, this work demonstrates how AI integration can be
achieved with minimal disruption and without increas-
ing system complexity. The proposed design extends
the RAN compute infrastructure to the AI datacenter
domain, introducing new monetization opportunities for
public and private operators. Specifically, we make the
following key contributions:
• Gap Analysis. We review AI-RAN activities and dis-
cuss the technical and operational challenges to achieve
seamless AI-RAN and O-RAN integration.
• Unified Architecture Design. We present a new com-
prehensive architecture that enables AI and RAN work-
loads to share infrastructure while maintaining perfor-
mance isolation and service quality, shown in Fig. 1. We
also identify and address the orchestration requirements
for managing heterogeneous AI and RAN workloads
at different time scales. Specifically, we identify and
propose two key architectural components. (i) The AI-
RAN Orchestrator (Fig. 1, top) extends the O-RAN
SMO framework for unified resource allocation, policy
management, and workload coordination across AI and
RAN services. (ii) The AI-RAN Sites augment the O-
RAN O-Cloud concept to further support AI within a
common RAN infrastructure, enabling a distributed edge
AI platform with real-time processing capabilities.
• Flexible Orchestration. We define comprehensive
procedures for deploying AI workloads on shared RAN
infrastructure, introducing two distinct workflows for
non-real-time batch and latency-critical deployments.
This work establishes an architectural blueprint for
next generation intelligent radio access networks that go
beyond traditional connectivity boundaries, enabling si-
multaneous delivery of telecommunications services and
distributed edge AI capabilities on shared infrastructure.
II. TOWARD AI-RAN
This section reviews the key elements of each AI-RAN
Alliance working group (AI-for-RAN, AI-on-RAN, AI-
and-RAN) and the O-RAN ALLIANCE architecture.
2
A. AI-RAN Principles
AI-for-RAN. The first pillar, AI-for-RAN, applies AI
to enhance network automation, efficiency, and adapt-
ability [6]. AI-for-RAN enhances RAN management
through data-driven decision-making and Digital Signal
Processing (DSP), improving performance, reliability,
and cost efficiency [2]. This enables intelligence and self-
optimization in existing RAN functions [2, 4].
AI-on-RAN. Conversely, AI-on-RAN enables AI and
generative AI applications to execute on the RAN in-
frastructure. These applications may or may not be
related to cellular systems, but leverage spare compute
capacity and the geographically distributed nature of
the RAN. RAN deployments are over-provisioned for
peak loads, therefore, by leveraging AI during low RAN
activity periods, operators can maximize infrastructure
efficiency without compromising connectivity [5]. By
embedding AI workloads within the RAN, AI-on-RAN
brings AI close to end-users and thus reduces the latency
and bandwidth overhead for transmission to centralized
data centers. This makes AI-on-RAN ideal for latency-
sensitive applications that require real-time inference and
decision making. It also helps distributing workloads
from large data centers to the edge. Examples of AI-
on-RAN workloads can include distributed AI training
(e.g., federated learning), video processing and computer
vision applications, or edge generative AI solutions (e.g.,
a low-latency edge instance of a Large Language Model
(LLM), chatbots, AI agents), among others.
AI-and-RAN. To enable infrastructure sharing across
AI applications and RAN workloads, AI-and-RAN fo-
cuses on the coexistence of heterogeneous workloads.
Indeed, AI and RAN workloads differ in terms of reli-
ability, availability, and performance requirements. The
RAN DSP represents a non-elastic workload, where tasks
need to be executed within specific timing constraints
to ensure intended functionality of the protocol stack
(e.g., for channel coding/decoding, scheduling). At the
same time, processing for a specific configuration (band-
width, number of MIMO streams) requires a fixed and
predictable amount of resources. AI and generative AI
inference or training solutions are more elastic, provided
that enough resources are allocated to load the data
structures associated with the AI models.
AI-RAN Orchestration Requirements. Considering
these requirements, the orchestration of AI-for/on-RAN
requires (i) a holistic accounting of the underlying com-
pute and networking resources, so as to dynamically
track infrastructure availability; (ii) northbound Appli-
cation Programming Interfaces (APIs) to AI and RAN
developers, to expose available capacity and to submit
workloads to the system, thus enabling infrastructure
monetization; (iii) an interface for operator require-
ments/intents (e.g., priority level for RAN workloads,
maximum latency for AI inference); (iv) a scheduling
strategy that combines requests, intents, and available
resources into actionable policies or allocations; and (v)
a southbound interface for AI and RAN configuration
and deployment. This also allows for preemption for
time-sensitive RAN workloads. Figure 1 captures these
requirements in the end-to-end architecture.
B. A Primer on Open RAN
The AI-RAN Alliance does not develop specifications
or standards, but builds on and influences those within
3GPP and the O-RAN ALLIANCE. The latter has driven
the design and development of networked systems that
abide by the principles of openness, programmability,
interoperability, and intelligent closed-loop control. A
complete overview can be found in [4].
The O-RAN architecture is based on a softwarized,
disaggregated RAN, with atomic network functions that
are deployed on the O-Cloud, a virtualization platform
for cellular systems. Through open interfaces, the RICs
connect the RAN to custom intelligence in xApps (for
the Near-RT RIC) and rApps (for the Non-RT RIC). The
SMO provides management and orchestration across the
whole network. The O-RAN architecture already features
pipelines and workflows for AI-for-RAN.
The SMO and Non-RT RIC concern network man-
agement in the time scale of seconds or more, for RAN
services and RAN performance/efficiency, respectively.
The latest O-RAN architecture decouples them in a
service-based framework, where the SMO combines
multiple independent services communicating through
the standardized SMO Services (SMOS) interface. The
O2 interface connects the SMO with the O-Cloud for in-
frastructure management and workload deployment [9].
III. CHALLENGES AND OPEN ISSUES TOWARD
AI-RAN AND O-RAN CONVERGENCE
The cloud-native architecture of Open RAN can
streamline AI-RAN innovation. Open interfaces and ser-
vice composition allow onboarding software, workloads,
and workflows from multiple vendors, providers, and
users. The open ecosystem fosters multi-vendor collabo-
ration, ensuring that AI algorithms can be developed and
deployed across diverse hardware and software platforms
without vendor lock-in and with well-defined procedures.
In addition, building on an existing architecture makes it
possible to avoid unnecessary complexity, extending O-
RAN components to also manage AI workloads rather
than introducing additional orchestration solutions.
3
Effective AI-and-RAN orchestration and integration
with O-RAN system, however, requires addressing sev-
eral challenges, which we discuss next.
Architecture and Orchestration Workflows Chal-
lenges. AI-RAN coexistence requires an evolution of the
3GPP and O-RAN architectures. The end-to-end man-
agement system requires an entity responsible for AI-
and-RAN coexistence, i.e., the orchestrator introduced in
Fig. 1 and in Sec. II. Challenges include understanding
what are effective control and data exposure abstractions,
which is network host for such functionalities, and if
orchestration requires a hierarchical approach.
From a workflow point of view, there is a need for
telemetry, control, and deployment pipelines, extending
the O-RAN interfaces to define the southbound and
northbound interfaces of the orchestrator (Fig. 1). South-
bound interfaces should support continuous telemetry
collection, preprocessing, and delivery from distributed
AI-RAN components, accommodating latency require-
ments for monitoring, inference, or control applications.
This unlocks the unique opportunity to systematically
create large-scale datasets. Finally, what Key Perfor-
mance Measurements (KPMs) are better suited to sup-
port orchestrator tasks is an open question.
Finally, the definition of AI-RAN-specific procedures
for AI lifecycle management implies regulating access to
RAN resources, orchestrating deployment across nodes,
and ensuring compliance with the operator’s policies.
To do so, current O-RAN interfaces (e.g., O1, O2, E2,
A1) require targeted modifications to support the dual
operation of RAN control loops and AI workflows.
Orchestration Challenges. An AI-RAN system (as
shown in Fig. 1) combines compute with different AI
accelerators (e.g., Graphics Processing Units (GPUs)),
storage, networking elements, radios, and spectrum. The
orchestrator needs to account for such heterogeneity
when allocating resources. Additional compute can be
available in the core network, which however does not
have the same distributed nature as the RAN. RAN
nodes exhibit diverse processing capabilities, also based
on deployment location, which can lead to inefficiencies
in workload distribution [1, 10]. The heterogeneity also
extends to the workloads. As discussed in Sec. II, AI
and RAN often have different workload patterns and
requirements. AI itself can range from lightweight infer-
ence for real-time network optimization or value-added
services to high-intensity model training. Moreover, the
unpredictability of AI workloads, and in particular that
of large-scale training tasks, can introduce latency spikes
that may negatively impact RAN performance [11, 12].
This complicates both monitoring, which needs to ac-
count for real-time variations in the workload intensity,
and orchestration, which needs to combine multi-scale
and proactive coexistence approaches. Finally, orchestra-
tion workflows can extend beyond the RAN, toward core
network functions that contribute to the AI operations.
Resource Allocation Challenges. The resource allo-
cation problem must consider operators’ priorities, the
multi-dimensionality of the problem (encompassing a
distributed infrastructure across different geographical
locations with heterogeneous capabilities), and poten-
tially a hierarchical control structure with varying gran-
ularity, from a centralized orchestrator to distributed
components. The orchestrator input also comes from dif-
ferent stakeholders (e.g., AI developers, RAN vendors,
operators), whose orthogonal requirements may need
to be harmonized and reconciled. Moreover, operators
may impose different Service Level Agreement (SLA)
to AI and RAN. These may change across sites and
time and need to be accounted for when allocating
resources. Therefore, while solutions can be inspired by
prior work on scheduling and slicing, they also need to
take into account the complexity of the input, output, and
dimensionality of the infrastructure partitioning problem.
Use Case, Monetization, and Energy Efficiency
Challenges. The AI-RAN orchestrator enables monetiza-
tion strategies for next-generation wireless by identifying
trade-offs, prioritizing, and provisioning strategies to
satisfy both AI and RAN tenants. To successfully cater to
AI-on-RAN stakeholders, the orchestrator needs to align
with AI and cloud best practices.
The coexistence and monetization challenge also ex-
tends to energy efficiency. With RAN energy consump-
tion being the highest operational expenditure for oper-
ators to date, it is important to adopt an energy-efficient
and opportunistic approach to the acceleration of AI, and
to account for the impact of energy in the total costs
of the AI-RAN infrastructure. AI models are usually
associated with high computational demands, in contrast
to recent trends for low-power RAN components. Hard-
ware acceleration offers potential mitigation but requires
careful scheduling to ensure energy efficiency [11] while
accounting for non-linearity and multi-dimensionality of
the AI accelerators power consumption as a function of
processor load, memory utilization, and data transfer.
Integrating third-party AI workloads also presents
challenges to security, privacy, and access management.
The orchestrator APIs and the end-to-end control and
infrastructure management pipelines need to ensure ac-
countability and tracking of security roles and privileges.
Deploying AI models or workloads with vulnerabilities
in the software stack could affect the stability of the
RAN. Such attacks could lead to network congestion,
degraded service quality, or large-scale outages [13].
4
AI-SMO
AI-RAN 
Resource 
Allocation
AI Workload 
Automation
Authentication/
Workload 
Validation
RAN SMO 
Components
RAN SMO 
Components
RAN SMO 
Components
Non-RT RIC
rApp
rApp
rApp
SMOS Interface
AI-O2 Termination
O1 Termination
A1 Termination
AI Workload Interface 
RAN Workload 
Interface
AI Devs
RAN Devs
Operator Policy 
Interface
Operator
• AI-on-RAN
• Prepare workload for deployment
• Checks/tests
CU/DU/Apps/AI
-for-RAN
AI-and-RAN 
coexistence policies
AI-RAN Orchestrator
Fig. 2: Extension of the O-RAN SMO to support AI-RAN orchestra-
tion. The components in light blue, together with the SMOS, are part
of the O-RAN SMO architecture. Components in dark blue represent
extensions to accommodate AI-RAN requirements.
In the next section, we introduce an architecture
designed to address these challenges while adhering to
the design principle of minimizing system complexity,
and considering factors such as privacy and security.
IV. CONVERGED AI-RAN AND O-RAN
ARCHITECTURE
Building on the architecture in Fig. 1 and the require-
ments identified above, Figs. 2 and 3 detail the specific
AI-RAN extensions to O-RAN components and their
interfaces. This converged architecture has been designed
to enable two concurrent workflows for the orchestration,
deployment, and execution of AI workloads, i.e., batch
and real-time. In batch mode, AI tasks are submitted to
the centralized orchestrator, and distributed when/where
compute capacity is available. This can be used, for
example, for AI training, or general AI processing that
requires acceleration on GPU but does not have con-
straints on the deployment location and timing of the de-
ployment. In real-time mode, AI developers submit jobs
for direct execution to a specific cluster (or geographical
area of interest) and the request will be accommodated
by the orchestrator according to resource availability.
A. AI-SMO and AI-RAN Site
AI-SMO. Figure 2 illustrates the architectural exten-
sion of the SMO toward an AI-enabled SMO (AI-SMO).
Besides O-RAN SMO components connected through
the SMOS bus, a set of new micro-services covers the
following functionalities: resource allocation, AI work-
load automation, authentication and workload validation
for the AI components, and exposure of interfaces to
interact with the AI-RAN elements. By embedding the
AI-RAN orchestrator in the SMO, we provide the or-
chestrator with (i) access to granular monitoring data
on the infrastructure already collected through the O-
RAN O1 and O2 interfaces; and (ii) a global, centralized
viewpoint on the distributed RAN infrastructure that
enables a holistic approach to allocation of resources to
either AI or RAN workloads. The workload validation
and AI user authentication provide access control with
an authorization process that vets users and AI tasks
before they are admitted to the system. It validates the
identity of AI users through the northbound interface to
handle requests for training or inference execution. Upon
successful validation, the service issues an authorization
token granting access to the appropriate resources. The
authentication mechanism can be tailored to the specific
deployment operational constraints, thanks to the disag-
gregated design of the AI-SMO. Then, upon availability
of resources determined by the orchestrator, AI task
requests are forwarded to the AI workloads automa-
tion component, which triggers their deployment to the
AI-RAN infrastructure sites. This component operates
in parallel to equivalent services for RAN workloads,
including the Network Function Orchestration (NFO)
and Federated O-Cloud Orchestration and Management
(FOCOM) services, with which it coordinates through
the SMOS. Batch AI and RAN workloads are deployed
to the selected AI-RAN edge sites using an extension
of the O2 interface (AI-O2), which also communicates
to the edge sites that resource allocation schedules or
policies defined by the AI-RAN Orchestration service.
Quality of Service (QoS) policies for AI-O2 traffic can
further help by prioritizing RAN workloads over less
time-sensitive AI tasks. Finally, operators can dynami-
cally express geographically and temporally customized
policies that determine AI and RAN sharing strategies.
AI-RAN Site. At the other end of the AI-O2 interface,
the AI-RAN edge site, shown in Fig. 3, is responsible
for the granular, container-level service orchestration.
Here, the O-Cloud extends into an AI-ready version
that can manage containerized workloads for AI and
RAN solutions, and also potentially distributed core
components such as a local User Plane Function (UPF).
Figure 3 also shows the taxonomy of workloads that
can be executed on AI-RAN sites. Besides AI-driven
Central Units (CUs) and Distributed Units (DUs), AI-for-
RAN solutions include, for example, dApps [14], real-
time programmable components that extend the O-RAN
architecture to provide intelligence within the protocol
stack. An additional AI-for-RAN category, outside of the
RAN CUs/DUs, is represented by AI-accelerated Near-
RT RICs, which can be hosted at the edge to satisfy near-
real-time inference and control constraints. AI-on-RAN
solutions can include training for AI models, generative
AI services (e.g., chatbots), sensing based on AI, and
other edge inference tasks, among others.
The AI-RAN site is equipped with compute (including
AI accelerators, e.g., GPUs), storage, and networking
5
AI-RAN Site: AI-O-Cloud Instance
Compute Cluster
AI-RAN Accelerators 
(e.g., GPUs)
Storage
Network
Real-time Container Orchestration
AI-O-Cloud
Infrastructure
Management 
Service (IMS)
O-CU-UP
SDAP
PDCP
O-CU-CP
RRC
PDCP
O-DU
RLC
MAC
PHY-high
AI CU/DU
AI-RAN Workloads
AI-for-RAN
AI/ML Workloads
AI/ML Training
Generative AI Services
AI-driven Sensing
…
AI-Accelerated Near-RT RIC
AI-on-RAN
AI-for-RAN
xApp
xApp
…
AI-O2 
Termination
O1 
Termination
MEC 
Termination
AI-O-Cloud
Deployment
Management 
Service (DMS)
Monitoring
dApps
dApps
dApps
(d)UPF
Orchestration
Infrastructure
Network Functions
Fig. 3: Architecture for an edge cloud site that supports AI-RAN so-
lutions on a compute cluster managed by the AI-O-Cloud. The figure
shows the AI workloads and RAN workloads (top), the orchestration
components (middle), and the infrastructure and interfaces (bottom).
resources. These are managed by a container orches-
tration platform (e.g., Kubernetes or Red Hat Open-
Shift), which also provides tenant’s workload isolation
via namespaces. Both of these components are managed
by the AI-O-Cloud Infrastructure Management Service
(IMS) and Deployment Management Service (DMS).
These extend O-RAN services that terminate the O2
interface for infrastructure configuration and workload
lifecycle management, respectively. In the AI-O-Cloud,
they also translate policies and schedules determined by
the SMO into AI infrastructure configurations and AI
workload deployment, while enabling coexistence with
the RAN.
B. Scalability and Real-time Deployment Workflow
The service-based nature of the AI-SMO favors scal-
ability, with different components that can be scaled to
handle increasing workloads submissions or large num-
ber of sites. At the same time, the AI batch submission
workflow and specific instances of optimization for the
resource allocation may introduce delays when applied
to large-scale systems. Further, specific AI-on-RAN task
may require low-latency deployments. Examples include
AI inference services that are dynamically offloaded by
or need to follow highly mobile users in a network, e.g.,
connected autonomous vehicles. Public safety sensing
applications may need rapid deployment in response to
Real-time AI task can be executed
AI-SMO
AI-RAN Site
AI User
Authentication request
•
Identity validation
•
Resources required
Authentication 
response
•
AI-RAN sharing 
policy
•
User priority
•
Auth validation
Real-time AI workload 
request
•
Identity validation
•
Resources required
MEC interface
AI-SMO AI Workload Interface
AI-SMO AI Workload Interface
AI-O2
AI-O-Cloud DMS/IMS
•
Check policy
•
Check resources
MEC interface
•
Process
•
Return output
No capacity for real-time AI task
MEC interface
•
Decline
Batch AI workload 
request
Queue task and 
execute when 
capacity is available at AI-RAN site
Fig. 4: Procedure for the authentication and deployment of real-time
AI tasks on the AI-RAN infrastructure.
an emergency. For this reason, in Fig. 4, we propose a
procedure for the real-time deployment of AI workloads.
It combines (i) pre-authentication with the AI-SMO, with
an indication of computing requirements at specific AI-
RAN sites; (ii) the definition of a resource sharing policy
in the AI-RAN Orchestrator, which is then communi-
cated to the edge site through AI-O2; (iii) the use of a
Multi-access Edge Computing (MEC) interface, adopting
the ETSI standards for edge computing, by the pre-
authenticated users to submit real-time AI workloads to a
specific AI-RAN site; and (iv) involvement of the DMS,
which allocates resources and deploys the AI services
with minimal latency, as long as the amount of resources
required is compatible with the policy defined by the AI-
RAN Orchestrator. If not, the AI task is not admitted,
and the process resumes at the AI-SMO, where the user
can explore options to increase priority of the task (e.g.,
through different monetization tiers) or submit it as a
batch workload or to a different AI-RAN site.
C. Profiling the AI-RAN Site
We profile the feasibility of the approach with a
prototype of the AI-RAN site, focusing on AI and RAN
coexistence and on their deployment latency. The results
are based on multiple, independent experiments executed
on the Northeastern University X5G testbed [15], which
implements a private 5G network with multiple com-
mercial O-RAN Radio Units (RUs) and fronthaul infras-
tructure. We integrate in X5G a single-node OpenShift
cluster with a Gigabyte server with an x86 CPU and
an NVIDIA A100 GPU. For the RAN software, we use
the NVIDIA Aerial GPU-accelerated physical layer and
OpenAirInterface. For AI workloads, we use different
Ollama-based LLMs (processing prompts), and a Con-
volutional Neural Network (CNN) or a ResNet model
6
CNN
ResNet
CNN
ResNet
0
20
40
60
—— Llama-3.2-3B ——
—— Llama-3-8B ——
MAC Throughput [Mbps]
DL Th / RAN-only
DL Th / AI-RAN Coexistence
0
5
10
15
CRC Error Rate [error/s]
CRC Error Rate / RAN-only
CRC Error Rate / AI-RAN Coexistence
Fig. 5: Median values for throughput and CRC error rate with RAN
only (solid bars) or AI-RAN coexistence with LLM prompts and
CNN/ResNet (dotted bars).
0
10
20
30
40
Qwen2.5-1.5B
Llama-3.2-1B
Llama-3.2-3B
Llama-3-8B
Time [s]
LLM
RAN
CNN
Fig. 6: Workload deployment latency on the AI-RAN site.
trained live on CIFAR-100. The AI-SMO configures the
AI-RAN site GPU with Multi-Instance GPU (MIG), an
NVIDIA technology for resource partitioning. For these
experiments, the GPU is partitioned in 3, with 40 GB for
RAN, 20 GB for LLM, and 10 GB for ResNet/CNN.
Figure 5 reports the median throughput and CRC error
rate at the MAC layer, thus including retransmissions,
with 95% confidence intervals computed with the boot-
strap method. The solid bars report the performance
without AI; dotted bars are for experiments with User
Equipment (UE) traffic, the CNN/ResNet training, and
the LLM being prompted. The performance is consistent
across all experiments, validating AI-RAN coexistence
even in a single-node site.
Figure 6 illustrates the sequential deployment latency
for different LLMs models and parameter sizes. We
profile the workload deployment latency from when the
AI-RAN site receives the request to when the service
is available, assuming a sequential deployment for the
LLM, followed by the RAN and ResNet. As can be
seen, the RAN and ResNet are deployed in 1-4 s, with
the longer time following the deployment of the largest
Llama model that fits the MIG partition. LLM instances
require between 5.8-34.4 s (average). This shows that
complex workloads can be managed on the same in-
frastructure in a matter of seconds, and provides an
indication of the dynamicity with which such workloads
can be (re)deployed by the AI-SMO.
V. CONCLUSIONS
We presented an end-to-end network architecture for
AI-RAN coexistence. After reviewing the AI-RAN Al-
liance activities and O-RAN architecture, we discussed
the challenges associated to operating AI and RAN on
the same infrastructure. We then proposed an extension
of the O-RAN architecture and O-RAN components that
enables the deployment and management of AI work-
loads on the shared RAN infrastructure, including dif-
ferent modes for managing AI workloads with different
requirements for deployment latency and location. Near-
term extensions of this work include further development
of the architecture into an end-to-end prototype serving
as a platform to validate resource allocation strategies.
In the medium term, it will also facilitate studying how
interfaces and design can be streamlined into O-RAN
and AI-RAN Alliances activities and specifications.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Kundu, X. Lin, R. Gadiyar, J.-F. Lacasse, and S. Chowd-
hury, “AI-RAN: Transforming RAN with AI-driven Computing
Infrastructure,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.09007, 2025.
[2] AI-RAN Alliance, “AI-RAN Vision and Mission White Paper,”
Tech. Rep., 2024. [Online]. Available: https://archive.is/H80U4
[3] S. Duan, D. Wang, J. Ren, F. Lyu, Y. Zhang, H. Wu, and
X. Shen, “Distributed Artificial Intelligence Empowered by
End-Edge-Cloud Computing: A Survey,” IEEE Commun. Sur-
veys & Tuts., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 591–624, Firstquarter 2023.
[4] M. Polese, L. Bonati, S. D’Oro, S. Basagni, and T. Melodia,
“Understanding O-RAN: Architecture, interfaces, algorithms,
security, and research challenges,” IEEE Commun. Surveys &
Tut., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 1376–1411, 2023.
[5] G. Ananthanarayanan, X. Foukas, B. Radunovic, and Y. Zhang,
“Distributed AI Platform for the 6G RAN,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.03747, 2024.
[6] N. Li, Y. Wang, Q. Sun, X. Li, J. Huang, C. Liu, Y. Huang,
Z. Hu, Y. Han, and C.-L. I, “Rethinking RAN Architecture
for Deep Fusion of AI and Communication in 6G,” IEEE Wir.
Commun., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 164–174, 2025.
[7] S. D. A. Shah, Z. Nezami, M. Hafeez, and S. A. R. Zaidi,
“The Interplay of AI-and-RAN: Dynamic Resource Allocation
for Converged 6G Platform,” arXiv:2503.07420, 2025.
[8] P.-C. Hung, Y.-K. Lin, Y.-C. Jhuang, T.-W. Choong, and J.-S.
Leu, “DMMP: The AI Service Platform with O-RAN Toward
AI-RAN,” in EuCNC/6G Summit, June 2025, pp. 121–126.
[9] O-RAN WG6, “O-RAN Cloud Architecture and Deployment
Scenarios for O-RAN Virtualized RAN 8.01,” TS, 2025.
[10] H. Liu, J. Zong, Q. Wang, Y. Liu, and F. Yang, “Cloud Native
Based Intelligent RAN Architecture Towards 6G Programmable
Networking,” in Proc. of ICCCS, 2022.
[11] L. Kundu, X. Lin, E. Agostini, V. Ditya, and T. Martin,
“Hardware acceleration for Open Radio Access Networks: A
contemporary overview,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 62, no. 9,
pp. 160–167, 2023.
[12] 3GPP, “Study on Artificial Intelligence (AI)/Machine Learning
(ML) for NR Air Interface (Release 18),” Tech. Rep. TR 38.843
V18.0.0, Dec. 2023.
[13] N. A. Khan and S. Schmid, “AI-RAN in 6G Networks: State-of-
the-Art and Challenges,” IEEE Open Journal of the Commun.
Soc., vol. 5, pp. 294–311, 2023.
7
[14] A.
Lacava,
L.
Bonati,
N.
Mohamadi,
R.
Gangula,
F. Kaltenberger, P. Johari, S. D’Oro, F. Cuomo, M. Polese, and
T. Melodia, “dApps: Enabling real-time AI-based Open RAN
control,” Computer Networks, vol. 269, p. 111342, 2025.
[15] D. Villa, I. Khan, F. Kaltenberger, N. Hedberg, R. S. da Silva,
S. Maxenti, L. Bonati, A. Kelkar, C. Dick, E. Baena, J. M.
Jornet, T. Melodia, M. Polese, and D. Koutsonikolas, “X5G: An
Open, Programmable, Multi-Vendor, End-to-End, Private 5G O-
RAN Testbed With NVIDIA ARC and OpenAirInterface,” IEEE
Trans. Mobile Comp., vol. 24, no. 11, Nov 2025.
Michele Polese is a Research Assistant Professor at Northeastern.
He received his Ph.D. from the University of Padova in 2020.
Niloofar Mohamadi is Principal Software Engineer at Northeastern.
She received her Ph.D. from Ontario Tech University in 2022.
Salvatore D’Oro is a Research Associate Professor at Northeastern
and the CTO at zTouch Networks. He received his Ph.D. from the
University of Catania in 2015.
Leonardo Bonati is an Associate Research Scientist at Northeastern
University, where he received his Ph.D. in 2022.
Tommaso Melodia is the William Lincoln Smith Chair Professor at
Northeastern University and Director of the Institute for the Wireless
Internet of Things.
8
