Disclaimer: This work has been accepted for publication in the IEEE Communications Magazine. © 2024 IEEE. Personal
use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media,
including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale
or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.
arXiv:2403.16186v1  [cs.IT]  24 Mar 2024
1
Site-Specific Beam Alignment in 6G
via Deep Learning
Yuqiang Heng, Yu Zhang, Ahmed Alkhateeb and Jeffrey G. Andrews
Abstract—Beam alignment (BA) in modern millimeter wave
standards such as 5G NR and WiGig (802.11ay) is based on
exhaustive and/or hierarchical beam searches over pre-defined
codebooks of wide and narrow beams. This approach is slow and
bandwidth/power-intensive, and is a considerable hindrance to
the wide deployment of millimeter wave bands. A new approach
is needed as we move towards 6G. BA is a promising use case
for deep learning (DL) in the 6G air interface, offering the
possibility of automated custom tuning of the BA procedure for
each cell based on its unique propagation environment and user
equipment (UE) location patterns. We overview and advocate for
such an approach in this paper, which we term site-specific beam
alignment (SSBA). SSBA largely eliminates wasteful searches
and allows UEs to be found much more quickly and reliably,
without many of the drawbacks of other machine learning-aided
approaches. We first overview and demonstrate new results on
SSBA, then identify the key open challenges facing SSBA.
I. INTRODUCTION
Next generation cellular networks will need to deliver
extremely high data rates for emerging applications, which
will necessitate much more effective utilization of the vast
amount of spectrum above 28 GHz. The high isotropic pathloss
at these frequencies require highly directional beamforming
(BF), where base stations (BSs) and user equipments (UEs)
– both equipped with dense antenna arrays – focus energy in
particular directions. Finding and maintaining near-optimal BF
directions – a process known as beam alignment (BA) – is the
critical bottleneck to unleashing this spectrum. Done correctly,
high directionality also provides a path to much improved
power efficiency, which will be required for important emerg-
ing use cases such as Augmented Reality (AR) glasses that
have both high bandwidth demands and small power budgets.
The BA framework in 5G relies on extensive beam sweep-
ing, measurement and reporting. In the downlink, the BS
periodically sweeps one or more generic codebooks of pre-
defined beams by transmitting beamformed reference signals
(RSs) while the UE sweeps its receive (Rx) codebook1. The
best beam or multiple beam pairs with the highest received
power are selected and reported to the BS. This simple proce-
dure handles the BA procedure both for initial access (IA) of
previously undetected UEs and for tracking already connected
Yuqiang Heng was and Jeffrey G. Andrews is with The University of
Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA. Y. Heng is now with Samsung. Yu Zhang
and Ahmed Alkhateeb are with Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
Corresponding
author:
J.
G.
Andrews
(e-mail:
jan-
drews@ece.utexas.edu). Last modified: Tuesday 26th March, 2024.
1Although this article is focused on cellular networks, in particular 5G
and 6G, nearly everything we discuss is directly applicable to other millimeter
wave systems such as the various WiGig standards operating in the 60 GHz
band, which also rely on beam sweeping and suffer from slow BA.
UEs. To guarantee that most unconnected UEs can be found
during IA, generic codebooks with quantized BF angles that
cover the entire angular space are usually adopted. While on
some level “foolproof” since new UEs can be found regardless
of their location in the angular space, this approach to BA is
obviously inefficient. It effectively starts from scratch during
each search cycle, learning nothing from previous searches.
It is agnostic to the propagation environment or the historic
probability of finding a UE in a particular direction.
For these reasons, a data-driven and learning-based ap-
proach should be highly beneficial for BA for 6G. In particular,
we will argue that deep learning (DL) is well-suited to
tackle these challenges with its powerful function approxi-
mation capabilities, relatively low complexity, and its well
understood training and convergence properties. By leveraging
characteristics of the propagation environment and patterns
of UE distribution and mobility, a site-specific DL approach
can eliminate unproductive searches while quickly predicting
beams that point accurately towards UEs.
While a few recent works have provided useful surveys of
general applications of DL in beam management [1], [2], we
present a more focused perspective by limiting our scope to
the spatial and site-specific aspects. We first identify (Sect. II)
the key requirements of BA and their implication to DL-based
approaches. We then overview the concept and key aspects and
advantages of state-of-the-art of site-specific DL techniques
for BA in Sect. III. In Sect. IV we overview 3 specific ways
to do site-specific beam alignment (SSBA) that have been
developed independently by the authors, and we present a
unified and novel comparison of their performance using ray
tracing in a Boston neighborhood. We include other baselines
and theoretical upper bounds and observe the consistently
immense potential of SSBA for improving beamforming gain
with a drastically reduced number of beam searches. A number
of important open problems remain, and these challenges are
identified and several promising directions for future research
are proposed to conclude the article.
II. KEY CRITERIA FOR DL-AIDED BA
An intelligent BA method should be able to accurately
and quickly identify high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) beams
for each UE in the cell without exhaustively searching all
candidates. However, high BF gain and low search latency
are not the only requirements of an ideal BA method. After
all, the exhaustive and the hierarchical search with uniform
codebooks have been adopted in 5G largely because they can
be deployed in any cell site without any custom adaptation,
2
and they allow new UEs to be discovered without special side
information (e.g. GPS coordinates) or excessive amounts of
feedback.
Therefore, we first identify the key requirements for a 6G
BA method. These four requirements should apply univer-
sally, and in many cases they rule out proposed DL-aided
approaches, as we now discuss.
R1: Accurate and Fast over Entire UE population. A
trade-off between speed and SNR is unavoidable in most
BA methods: better beams may be found by increasing the
resolution of the codebook or more frequently sweeping the
codebook, at the direct expense of latency and overhead.
However, some BA methods may present much better such
SNR-speed tradeoffs than others, especially when BA for
all UEs is considered collectively. Notably, many proposed
DL-based approaches leverage environment-specific and even
UE-specific features, but the gain diminishes about linearly
with the number of UEs due to the requirement of a per-
UE search. This is because the beam refinement search in 5G
NR has to be conducted through Channel State Information
Reference Signal (CSI-RS) on a per-UE basis even though the
Synchronization Signal Blocks (SSBs) beams are broadcasted
cell-wide [3]. Therefore, the total cell-wide latency – the
number of searches to achieve BA for all UEs – is the correct
latency metric.
R2: Versatile. A BA method should work well in a large
variety of deployments, including urban, suburban, outdoor
and indoor environments with many different types of UEs.
Each deployment has unique challenges: an outdoor vehicular
UE has high velocity but predictable mobility patterns while
an indoor extended reality (XR) user may experience fast
unpredictable rotations and more frequent non-line-of-sight
(NLOS) conditions. Rather than designing a different BA
approach for each scenario, e.g. using application-specific
sensor data, a desirable BA method should handle a wide range
of scenarios in a single framework.
R3: Scalable to Higher Carrier Frequencies. While the
array size and thus channel dimensionality will grow consider-
ably as 6G moves up in the spectrum, the BA complexity and
latency should only increase moderately. This is achievable in
theory since channel sparsity is preserved at higher carrier fre-
quencies. DL-based methods can learn the underlying channel
structure and intelligently predict the optimal beams without
significantly increasing the BA latency. Grid-free approaches
that directly compute BF weights will become more attractive
since codebooks with thousands of narrow beams will prove
cumbersome.
R4: Self-training and Auto-updating. For real-world
adoption of DL in BA, the BS and UEs could be deployed as
usual with a default codebook and/or BA procedure. Learn-
ing should ideally utilize ongoing over-the-air measurements
possibly along with mostly automated site-specific simulation,
so that devices can seamlessly transition to perform BA
with the DL-aided methods once they have been sufficiently
trained. Furthermore, the DL models should also be able to
continuously (or at least periodically) improve and adapt. This
is a major open challenge not well-addressed to date, as most
existing approaches assume extensive offline training prior to
deployment and when or how to re-train is also not well
understood.
III. BEAM ALIGNMENT WITH SITE-SPECIFIC LEARNING
The BA procedure has two main components: channel
sensing and beam selection. The objective of channel sensing
is to collect spatial information about the channel between the
transmitter and receiver. This is done using a channel probing
codebook which could be as simple as a fixed set of relatively
wide beams (as in 5G NR IA) or a more sophisticated com-
pressive sensing measurement codebook. The measurements
from channel sensing are then leveraged to design the data
transmission beam either by selecting it from a pre-defined
codebook or by computing an arbitrary beam. Interestingly,
these two stages strongly depend on the attributes of the
specific site and environment, such as the outdoor buildings’
geometry or indoor floor layout, antenna panel orientation,
and user locations. This motivates what we call site-specific
learning for BA, whereby both the sensing and the beam
selection tasks attempt to exploit aspects of their specific cell
site. In this section, we outline the key ideas behind site-
specific sensing and beam prediction and highlight both the
potential gains and key design considerations.
Traditional Approaches Are Not Site-Specific. Traditional
BA techniques generally follow one of two main approaches:
beam training or channel estimation-based. In beam training,
the transmitter and receiver sweep over the beams in the
probing codebook in an attempt to select the most promising
pair of beams. This beam pair could be directly used for
data transmission in the case of exhaustive search, or further
refined, for example via hierarchical codebooks with different
beamwidths. Beam training is the BA approach adopted in
IEEE 802.11ad/ay, as well as in at least the first three releases
of 5G [3]. For channel estimation-based beam design, the
multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) matrix channel is first
estimated, typically using compressive sensing measurement
codebooks but possibly via other channel estimation methods
based on the reception of pilot (reference) signals [4]. The
estimated channel is then used to design the beamforming
vectors, for example the maximum left (transmit) and right
(receive) singular vectors of the channel matrix. In neither case
does the channel probing codebook and the beam selection
process leverage site-specific attributes nor prior observations.
Potential Gains with Site-Specific Optimization. Since
the two components of the BA process – channel sensing and
beam selection – rely heavily on characteristics such as the
geometry of the buildings and scatterers around the BS and
UEs, as well as the UE locations, it is intuitive that optimizing
each BS’s probing codebook and beam selection criteria based
on these site-specific characteristics may significantly improve
the BA performance. For example, instead of scanning all
directions, the probing beam codebook could focus on the
most frequently useful directions and avoid directions with
line-of-sight (LOS) blockages or where UEs are rarely found.
Similarly, channel compressive sensing codebooks could be
refined to focus the sensing energy on the most important
dimensional subspaces. The probing beams can be transmitted
3
Site-Specific Propagation
(Spatial Signature)
Probing Beams
Communication
Codebook Beams
Reduced Measurements
Channel
Sensing
Beam
Prediction
BS
BS
UE
UE
Weights Are
Probing Beams
Fig. 1: An illustration of SSBA that consists of channel probing and beam selection. The figure presents the deployment phase
where the system can directly select the desired beam based on channel sensing power measurements.
using SSBs in a 6G system, allowing new UEs to be discov-
ered and complete IA. Furthermore, beam selection can also
leverage site-specific prior observations. Conceptually, it can
bias towards more commonly selected beams and deprioritize
beam pairs that have often provided low SNR previously. This
approach can reduce the BA overhead and enhance the beam
selection accuracy as shown in Section IV.
Role of Data and Deep Learning. Realizing the potential
of site-specific BA optimization using classical signal process-
ing techniques is non-trivial. First, mmWave systems rely on
analog-only or hybrid analog/digital transceiver architectures
which impose strict constraints on the beamforming weights.
This makes the site-specific probing codebook optimization
problem highly non-convex and difficult to solve. Second,
unless the probing codebook has simple steering beams, the
mapping function that maps the outcomes of the channel
sensing to the best data transmission beam is hard to charac-
terize analytically. This motivates leveraging data-driven DL
to design site-specific BA approaches. Deep neural networks
(DNNs) possess superior expressive power and have been
proven successful in solving many challenging, non-convex
problems. In particular, with proper design of the machine
learning (ML) architecture, loss function, and learning strat-
egy, we can learn both optimized site-specific channel probing
codebooks and functions that map the measurements of these
probing codebooks to data transmission beams.
Key Considerations for Site-Specific Learning. We em-
phasize two important considerations for SSBA. First, devel-
oping and evaluating site-specific beam prediction solutions
requires using site-specific channel datasets, either from the
real world or accurate ray-tracing simulations. This is essential
since the key idea here is that the probing codebook and the
beam selection are based on the underlying channel structure
of the specific deployment. This per-site specialization is
where the gains come from, and therefore using general statis-
tical channel models that do not capture the dependency on the
site geometry and user distribution will prove unsuccessful. We
will argue that the “price” for this data acquisition and site-
specific modeling is well-justified and not necessarily even
very large, but nevertheless this is a key new challenge versus
current approaches that are not site-specific.
Second, it is important to differentiate between the design
and the training of the BA machine learning model. While
the training should mainly utilize site-specific datasets and
measurements, and thus be optimized and tuned for the
specific deployment, the model itself should be universal and
scalable so that it could work in a large number of sites across
a variety of deployments.
IV. END-TO-END LEARNING FOR SITE-SPECIFIC BEAM
ALIGNMENT
As discussed in Section III, the SSBA has two sub-
problems: (i) learning site-specific channel probing codebook
and (ii) learning the mapping from the channel sensing mea-
surements to beams. The two problems are coupled, where
the ultimate objective is to achieve accurate prediction with
smallest possible number of measurements. Given this cou-
pling, end-to-end learning that jointly optimizes the probing
codebook and learns the mapping function based on a com-
mon loss function is our recommended approach for SSBA
solutions. In this section, we present two end-to-end learning
frameworks for SSBA and discuss their tradeoffs, and compare
them in a common experimental setting.
Codebook Based Beam Prediction. The first framework
is based on selecting the best narrow beam from a discrete
set, i.e. from a codebook. The codebook-based (CB) approach
is closely related to existing standards like 5G, and the
option to perform over-the-air beam refinement makes its beam
predictions more robust. Beam tracking is also more intuitive
and convenient with CB approaches, since adjacent beams in
the codebook can be monitored. We consider two CB-based
4
Base Station
Probing Beams
Fig. 2: Illustration of DeepMIMO Boston5G scenario with the learned probing beam patterns overlaid for visualization purposes.
2 4
8
12
16
20
24
28
32
48
Number of Probing Beams for Channel Sensing
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
Average SNR (dB)
EGT
CB, genie
GF [6], DL probing
CB [5], DL probing, top-4
CB [4], DL probing, top-4
CB [5], DL probing, top-1
CB [4], DL probing, top-1
GF [6], site-agnostic probing
CB [5], site-agnostic probing, top-1
Gain with SSBA
Fig. 3: Comparison of the average SNR achieved by site-
specific CB and GF approaches and site-agnostic baselines.
approaches, the first is adapted from the early work on site-
specific BA in [5] and the second is a more recent one, which
is presented in full detail in [6].
Grid-free Beam Prediction. The grid-free (GF) approach
holds out the possibility of identifying a truly optimum beam,
as well as eliminating any beam refinement search phases,
which become quite costly in a network setting as they must
be conducted on a per-UE basis. Thus, in principle, a well-
functioning and well-trained GF approach could potentially
require far fewer total beam search measurements over mul-
tiple UEs. However, the GF approach is more risky, since a
poorly calculated beam can be arbitrarily poor, and often the
training and beam normalizations are more sensitive than for a
predefined codebook. The results may also be less interpretable
since the action space is infinitely large. Our GF approach is
from [7].
Unified Ray Tracing Experiment. We now consider a
cellular simulation environment based on a section of down-
town Boston, shown in Fig. 2. The BS is located at an
intersection. There are a total of 77,597 UEs – of which
52% are LOS and 48% are NLOS – located along the two
horizontal and vertical streets closest to the BS. The channels
are generated through ray-tracing as discussed in [8], with
simulation parameters summarized in Table I. In particular, we
assume a 64 × 1 multiple-input single-output (MISO) uniform
linear array (ULA) scenario, but these approaches do extend to
more general MIMO and uniform planar array (UPA) models.
The BS performs analog BF with unquantized phase shifters,
for which equal gain transmission (EGT) with perfect per
antenna phase alignment is a true upper bound. An over-
sampled discrete Fourier transform (DFT) codebook with 256
beams is adopted for the codebook-based baselines. The CB
genie corresponds to the best beam in the codebook.
The first CB approach modifies the neural network (NN)
architecture originally proposed in [5], perhaps the earliest
work on end-to-end learning for site-specific BA. The probing
codebook is designed via a complex-valued NN and param-
eterized with the phase, from which the real and imaginary
parts of the probing beams are computed to enforce the unit-
modulus constraint. The mapping function consists of 2 hidden
layers with 512 and 1024 neurons, each with ReLu activation
followed by batch normalization, and an output layer with
sigmoid activation. The NN is trained to minimize the average
binary cross-entropy between the model output and the one-
hot encoded labels.
The second CB approach is from [6]. The probing codebook
is implemented as a complex-valued linear layer, which is
normalized per element to ensure the unit-modulus constraint.
The mapping function consists of 2 hidden layers with 520
neurons each and ReLu activation, and a linear output layer
with softmax activation. The NN is trained to minimize the
cross-entropy loss. Both CB models output the predicted
posterior probability of the optimal beam index.
The GF approach adopts the NN architecture in [7]. The
probing codebook is implemented as a complex-valued linear
layer with per-element normalization. The mapping function
5
TABLE I: Simulation Parameters
BS Antenna
64 × 1 ULA
BS Codebook Size
256
Antenna Element
Isotropic
Carrier Frequency
28 GHz
Bandwidth
50 MHz
Transmit Power
40 dBm
Noise PSD
-161 dBm/Hz
Probing Spreading Gain
32
consists of 2 hidden layers 520 neurons each and ReLu
activation, and a final linear layer that outputs the real and
imaginary parts of the predicted BF vector. The predicted BF
vector is also normalized element-wise to ensure the unit-
modulus constraint. The NN is trained to maximize the average
BF gain normalized by the channel norm.
The average SNR achieved by the site-specific (i.e. “DL
probing”) CB and GF approaches and the site-agnostic and
idealized baselines are shown in Fig. 3. It is important to re-
member that an exhaustive codebook search would entail 256
measurements and still perform below the CB genie in terms
of SNR (due to noise and the corresponding measurement and
feedback errors). We summarize some of the key takeaways
and insights now.
• Near optimal performance is achieved with a fraction of
the measurements/latency. Both the GF and CB methods
can achieve SNR within 1 and 0.5 dB from that of the genie
using just 8 and 16 probing measurements, respectively.
Compared to an exhaustive CB search, the latency is reduced
by 32× and 16×, respectively. The power demand of the
lightweight NN should be easily accommodated by BSs,
while UEs can save power by measuring fewer beams.
• GF beats CB in terms of total measurements. By eschewing
a refinement search phase – which is very helpful to the CB
techniques – the GF approach holds out the ultimate promise
for low latency searches. This is even more true if the UE
performs beamforming as well.
• CB approaches could be more robust. Since the top-
k predicted beams could be refined over the air (OTA)
(at additional overhead cost) to select the best beam, CB
approaches could generally be more robust to prediction
errors and less sensitive to quick changes in the environment.
• Site-specific probing is indispensable. If the learned prob-
ing beams are replaced with evenly-spaced “site agnositc”
narrow beams and the NNs are re-trained from scratch, there
is a large performance loss, of over 3 dB or equivalently a
factor of at least two in terms of required probing measure-
ments.
The shape of the learned probing beams is illustrated in Fig.
2. Note that a given probing beam can have several lobes of
varying strength, but each probing beam has the same total
transmit energy. They are clearly adapted to the environment:
they mainly focus their energy to cover the horizontal and
vertical streets on which UEs are scattered. This intuitively
demonstrates the importance of SSBA.
V. FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
While these DL-aided SSBA solutions show great promise,
there remain important open problems to solve. In this section,
we outline these important research problems and identify
promising future directions.
A. Practical Training and Deployment Approaches
Existing DL-aided BA methods typically employ an offline
training phase prior to deployment and the models need to
be retrained whenever the environment changes. Collecting
the large amount of training data required to represent the site
prohibits dynamic adaptation and network-wide deployment of
the site-specific models. Further, some DL-aided BA methods
require explicit full channel knowledge in the training phase,
which is hard to obtain in practice. Clearly, new deployment
paradigms will be necessary for SSBA to have a real-world
impact.
One encouraging direction lies in the adoption of digital
twins, which promise true-to-life simulations of the physical
environment at large scales [9]. High fidelity 3D models of
entire cities can be constructed from light detection and rang-
ing (LiDAR) and satellite data, which can also be dynamically
updated based on live-monitoring of the environment and UE
distribution. Enabled by the vast computational power of the
latest graphics processing units (GPUs) in the cloud, high
quality channels of millions of UEs can be simultaneously
generated with real-time ray-tracing. Initial applications are al-
ready seen in 5G cell planning [10] using Nvidia’s Omniverse-
based Aerial platform.
An envisioned use case for SSBA is illustrated in Fig. 4,
where the digital twin keeps a dynamically updated model
of a city-wide network. Copies of the SSBA NN models are
constantly fine-tuned or re-trained using data continuously
generated by the digital twin in the background, which can
be rapidly deployed to all the BSs to replace the outdated
models and calibrated through few-shot transfer learning with
a few OTA measurements. Such digital twins are envisioned
to be used for many other applications as well, including
outdoor XR experiences, driverless cars, and other types of
communication optimization, and so the required data and
platforms for SSBA may be available nearly “for free” in the
6G era.
B. Advanced Deep Learning Approaches
Existing work on DL-aided BA focused mainly on de-
veloping efficient learning models that can perform well on
small-scale datasets. Realizing the potential gains of SSBA
in practical deployments, however, requires developing full
ML operation frameworks that actively select which data to
keep, monitor distribution shifts, efficiently process large-scale
datasets, and frequently update the learning of the SSBA
models [11]. This is essential as the data-driven nature of
SSBA inherently requires these solutions to be able to detect
and account for any channel distribution shifts. Further, how
to efficiently select and utilize past data/observations is also
an important research direction. For instance, it might be
6
deploy NN model
update digital twin
DL-based BA model
Digital Twin
Actual Environment
model pretraining
model fine-tuning
collect OTA measurements
generate ray-tracing data
Fig. 4: Illustration of a DL-based BA pipeline aided by digital twin. The digital twin provides ray-tracing data to pretrain the
DL-based BA model. Measurements from the actual environment are used to fine-tune the BA model and update the digital
twin.
promising to leverage continual learning concepts to develop
systematic frameworks that can continuously acquire, update,
accumulate, and exploit knowledge throughout the operation
lifetime [12].
Another important direction is developing more advanced
learning architectures that can scale to more complex systems
and diverse deployment scenarios. Leveraging tools from
active learning to iteratively generate probing beams based
on previous measurements [13] is an interesting approach
to further reduce latency compared to using a fixed set of
probing beams. However, these approaches normally scale
poorly with the number of UEs since the probing beams are
UE-specific. Future research should investigate the gain of
site-specific and UE-specific BA and improve its scalability
under practical network considerations. Multi-task learning is a
potential approach to improve the learning and data efficiency
while making models more robust and generalizable [14].
Auxiliary tasks such as channel estimation and localization can
be solved simultaneously in additional to beam alignment by
designing a NN with a common probing codebook for channel
sensing and sub-modules to produce task-specific outputs.
C. Coverage and robustness
While DL-aided approaches often demonstrate much faster
BA, they have not yet addressed concerns over robustness and
reliability. Metrics such as average SNR and beam selection
accuracy used by most DL models do not paint the whole
picture. Operators often care more about providing a minimal
performance guarantee to cell-edge UEs and avoiding link
failures than maximizing the SNR for the top-percentile UEs.
Future research needs to focus on the entire performance
distribution and particularly on cell-edge UEs. Reliability
metrics such as the coverage should also be incorporated into
the training objective.
DL-aided BA methods also need to be robust against imper-
fections that arise in practical deployments. For example, the
channels used during training may be different from the actual
channel distribution experienced in practice, which could be
caused by channel estimation error, channel model inaccuracy
or mismatch between the simulated and actual environment.
Noisy environmental side information (ESI) and radio fre-
quency (RF) hardware imperfections will also deteriorate the
BA performance. Such imperfections need to be considered
and modeled in the training process. Adversarial training can
further improve the robustness of these DL models and im-
prove generalizability. Future research may also explore more
transparent and interpretable DL models, which would allow
us to better assess their performance in practical scenarios.
D. Uplink Alignment
Existing research on DL-aided BA has largely focused on
improving latency on the BS side and has not addressed several
unique challenges faced by UEs, namely power conservation
and nontrivial mobility and rotations. Millimeter wave UEs in
5G are assumed to have relatively few beams and moderate
mobility. In emerging use cases such as high-speed trains,
unmanned aerial vehicle and XR, UEs will experience more
complex mobility patterns and faster velocity and rotations.
Better tools are needed to model the 3D mobility, rotation
pattern and effect of self-blockage of UEs.
Uplink RSs defined in 5G can be repurposed for uplink
probing. The equivalent of SSBA for the uplink should learn
to capture additional information such as the rotation pattern,
correlation between antenna panels and device self-blockage
pattern that are unique to the UE. This could lead to joint
site and UE-specific BA approaches. As BF is intricately
tied to the characteristics of UEs, influenced by hardware
and implementation variations, the ideal probing codebook
and beam selection function may be different for each UE.
Ensuring the generalizability of SSBA to a range of UEs,
or its ability to evolve alongside shifts in UE populations, is
crucial. In general, if the impressive reduction in the number of
downlink measurements achieved by SSBA can be translated
to the uplink, the potential for power and latency reduction is
huge.
7
E. Network-wide Multi-cell Optimization
Existing approaches have considered single-cell scenarios
with uniformly distributed or clusters of UEs. Future research
may explore optimization in a multi-cell network. Whereas
cell boundaries in 5G are determined by the strongest beams
in the uniform codebooks, DL-aided BA methods may learn
site-specific codebooks or even GF BF. Hence, network-wide
optimization needs to coordinate among cells, each providing
non-uniform coverage. Training in a multi-cell deployment can
also take place in a centralized or distributed fashion, where
federated learning is a promising tool [15]. For instance, the
centralized cloud may gather data across the network to learn
a large model, which is distilled and adapted to each indi-
vidual cell using the smaller-scale site-specific data. Finally,
neighboring cells may share elements of their environment,
especially in denser networks at higher carrier frequencies.
Combined with the rising interest in multi-point connectivity,
information sharing and coordination BA among nearby BSs
is another promising research direction. In dense networks, the
BA decisions may also be coupled with other user association
and hand-off decisions, which motivate developing multi-task
DL models to address these cases.
F. Standardization and Commercial Deployment
Standardization of BA in 5G is built around assumptions
of sweeping, measurement and reporting of codebooks of
beams. For instance, the BS and the UE establish a mutual
correspondence between beams in the codebook, RSs and
resource blocks through transmission configuration indicator
(TCI) states. On the other hand, DL-aided methods can
use enormous codebooks represented by DNNs, making the
existing codebook-based signaling cumbersome. Furthermore,
the beams used by the UE are transparent to the BS during
feedback in 5G. For BA methods that rely on in-band sensing,
this limits the information available to the BS, which will be
a severe bottleneck when both BS and UE have large antenna
arrays. Future standards should dedicate resources and signals
for learning, such as for testing the learned beams before
deployment and for more robust and prioritized feedback of
the ESI or sensing measurements. While the existing BA
framework is simple, we need to reconsider codebook-based
assumptions and allow for more flexibility to accommodate
powerful DL-aided BA methods.
To accelerate research on DL-aided BA, more complete
and diverse public datasets should be developed for easier
training and standardized performance benchmarks. Compe-
titions should be hosted with a variety of hidden testing data
to encourage more competitive DL models and faster design
iterations. The industry can also accelerate SSBA by providing
practical deployment scenarios, allowing use of commercial-
grade simulators, and sharing real-world measurement data.
Deciding when these DL-aided BA techniques are ready for
actual deployment is another challenge.
VI. CONCLUSION
SSBA is an exciting application of deep learning that
can provide an increasingly rare opportunity for order-of-
magnitude improvements in physical layer performance met-
rics. It is a promising use case for DL in 5G-Advanced and 6G,
and could prove to be a crucial enabler for wider coverage and
deployment of mmWave spectrum, if the challenges identified
in this article can be satisfactorily addressed.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Qurratulain Khan, A. Gaber, P. Schulz, and G. Fettweis, “Machine
learning for millimeter wave and terahertz beam management: A survey
and open challenges,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 11880–11902, Feb.
2023.
[2] K. Ma, Z. Wang, W. Tian, S. Chen, and L. Hanzo, “Deep learning for
mmWave beam-management: State-of-the-art, opportunities and chal-
lenges,” IEEE Wireless Commun., pp. 1–8, Aug. 2022.
[3] Y. Heng, J. G. Andrews, J. Mo, V. Va, A. Ali, B. L. Ng, and J. C. Zhang,
“Six key challenges for beam management in 5.5G and 6G systems,”
IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 59, pp. 74–79, July 2021.
[4] R. W. Heath, N. Gonzalez-Prelcic, S. Rangan, W. Roh, and A. M.
Sayeed, “An overview of signal processing techniques for millimeter
wave MIMO systems,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 10,
pp. 436–453, Feb. 2016.
[5] X. Li and A. Alkhateeb, “Deep learning for direct hybrid precoding
in millimeter wave massive MIMO systems,” in Proc. IEEE Asilomar,
pp. 800–805, Nov. 2019.
[6] Y. Heng, J. Mo, and J. G. Andrews, “Learning site-specific probing
beams for fast mmWave beam alignment,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Com-
mun., vol. 21, pp. 5785–5800, Jan. 2022.
[7] Y. Heng and J. G. Andrews, “Grid-free MIMO beam alignment through
site-specific deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., May 2023.
early access.
[8] A. Alkhateeb, “DeepMIMO: A generic deep learning dataset for mil-
limeter wave and massive MIMO applications,” in Proc. Inf. Theory and
Appl. Workshop (ITA), pp. 1–8, Feb. 2019.
[9] A. Alkhateeb, S. Jiang, and G. Charan, “Real-time digital twins: Vision
and research directions for 6G and beyond,” arXiv preprint arXiv:
2301.11283, 2023.
[10] T. Mostak, “Introducing HeavyRF: Accelerated Cell Site Planning
for
Telcos.”
Accessed
Jul.
27,
2023.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.heavy.ai/blog/introducing-heavyrf-accelerated-cell-site-
planning-for-telcos.
[11] Y. Ovadia, E. Fertig, J. Ren, Z. Nado, D. Sculley, S. Nowozin, J. Dillon,
B. Lakshminarayanan, and J. Snoek, “Can you trust your model's
uncertainty? Evaluating predictive uncertainty under dataset shift,” in
Proc. NeurIPS, vol. 32, 2019.
[12] F. Zenke, B. Poole, and S. Ganguli, “Continual Learning Through
Synaptic Intelligence,” in Proc. ICML, vol. 70, pp. 3987–3995, Aug.
2017.
[13] F. Sohrabi, T. Jiang, W. Cui, and W. Yu, “Active sensing for commu-
nications by learning,” IEEE Journal on Sel. Areas in Communications,
vol. 40, pp. 1780–1794, Mar. 2022.
[14] S. Liu, E. Johns, and A. J. Davison, “End-to-end multi-task learning
with attention,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF CVPR, pp. 1871–1880, June 2019.
[15] A. M. Elbir, A. K. Papazafeiropoulos, and S. Chatzinotas, “Federated
learning for physical layer design,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 59,
pp. 81–87, Nov. 2021.
Yuqiang Heng is a senior research engineer at Samsung. He
earned his PhD at UT Austin in 2022 and BS at Rice.
Yu Zhang received his BS and MS from Beijing Jiaotong
University. He is a PhD student at ASU.
Ahmed Alkhateeb is an Assistant Professor at ASU. He holds
a PhD from UT Austin and has received awards including
the 2016 IEEE Signal Processing Society Young Author Best
Paper Award.
Jeffrey Andrews is the Truchard Family Endowed Chair in
Engineering at UT Austin and the Director of 6G@UT. He
received the 2019 IEEE Kiyo Tomiyasu Award and holds a
PhD from Stanford.
