arXiv:2406.03098v1  [cs.IT]  5 Jun 2024
1
A Data and Model-Driven Deep Learning Approach
to Robust Downlink Beamforming Optimization
Kai Liang, Gan Zheng, Fellow, IEEE, Zan Li, Senior Member, IEEE,
Kai-Kit Wong, Fellow, IEEE, and Chan-Byoung Chae, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—This paper investigates the optimization of the prob-
abilistically robust transmit beamforming problem with chan-
nel uncertainties in the multiuser multiple-input single-output
(MISO) downlink transmission. This problem poses signiﬁcant
analytical and computational challenges. Currently, the state-
of-the-art optimization method relies on convex restrictions as
tractable approximations to ensure robustness against Gaussian
channel uncertainties. However, this method not only exhibits
high computational complexity and suffers from the rank relax-
ation issue but also yields conservative solutions. In this paper,
we propose an unsupervised deep learning-based approach that
incorporates the sampling of channel uncertainties in the training
process to optimize the probabilistic system performance. We
introduce a model-driven learning approach that deﬁnes a new
beamforming structure with trainable parameters to account for
channel uncertainties. Additionally, we employ a graph neural
network to efﬁciently infer the key beamforming parameters. We
successfully apply this approach to the minimum rate quantile
maximization problem subject to outage and total power con-
straints. Furthermore, we propose a bisection search method to
address the more challenging power minimization problem with
probabilistic rate constraints by leveraging the aforementioned
approach. Numerical results conﬁrm that our approach achieves
non-conservative robust performance, higher data rates, greater
power efﬁciency, and faster execution compared to state-of-the-
art optimization methods.
Index Terms—Robust beamforming, deep learning, outage
probability constraint, multiuser MISO.
I. INTRODUCTION
B
EAMFORMING techniques in multi-user and multi-
antenna systems can effectively improve the throughput
and spectral efﬁciency of the wireless communication system,
and have received long-term attention from both academia
and industry [1]–[4]. Existing studies utilize beamforming
algorithms with known channel state information (CSI) at the
base station (BS) and perform interference cancellation and
resource allocation among multiple users. However, perfect
CSI in practical scenarios is difﬁcult to obtain, due to the
presence of channel estimation errors, the quantization errors
K. Liang, and Z. Li are with the State Key Laboratory of Integrated Service
Networks, the School of Telecommunications Engineering, Xidian University,
Xi’an, 710071, China (email: kliang@xidian.edu.cn, zanli@xidian. edu.cn).
G. Zheng is with the School of Engineering, University of Warwick,
Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK (email: gan.zheng@warwick.ac.uk).
K.-K. Wong is with the Department of Electronic and Electrical Engi-
neering, University College London, London, WC1E 6BT, UK (email: kai-
kit.wong@ucl.ac.uk). He is also afﬁliated with Yonsei Frontier Lab., Yonseu
University, Seoul, 03722, Korea.
C.-B. Chae is with School of Integrated Technology, Yonsei University,
Seoul, 03722, Korea (email: cbchae@yonsei.ac.kr).
from the user side feedback, and the time-varying nature of
wireless channels.
Since the imperfect CSI can worsen the performance
of multi-user multi-antenna system, this has motivated re-
searchers to carry out the robust design of beamforming,
i.e., the optimal beamforming design based on predeﬁned
CSI error model to mitigate the negative impact of imperfect
CSI. Existing works can usually be divided into three main
categories, namely, the worst-case robust approach [5]–[7], the
average robust approach [8], [9], and the outage-constrained
approach [10]–[12]. The worst-case robust approach aims to
guarantee the worst-case performance over all the potential
channel errors which are assumed to be bounded within some
closed sets. Since the worst-case scenario is a rarely happening
event in a multi-antenna system, the solutions obtained by
this approach are usually very conservative and requires high
resource consumptions. The average robust approach aims to
optimizing the average performance, but fails to guarantee the
outage requirement, which is vital for delay- or reliability-
sensitive applications in the next generation communication
system. Thus, in this paper, we focus on the outage-constrained
approach, because it is able to guarantee the probabilistic
quality of service (QoS) requirements of users. This approach
focuses on the QoS outage probability constraint based on a
probabilistic CSI error model (such as the Gaussian model).
Solving the outage constrained beamforming optimization
problem appears very hard, and the key challenge is how
to deal with the outage probability which in general does
not have a closed-form expression. Traditionally, the outage
constrained beamforming problem can be solved by convex
optimization after approximating the rate outage constraints.
In [12], the authors provided two approximation methods (i.e.,
Bernstein-type inequality (BTI) method and large deviation
inequality (LDI) method) together with semideﬁnite relaxation
[13], [14] under Gaussian CSI uncertainties to solve the outage
constrained robust beamforming problem and they are still
known to achieve the best solution so far. These methods have
been widely used in the studies of robust beamforming design
with CSI uncertainties, such as intelligent reﬂecting surface
[15], simultaneous wireless information and power transfer
(SWIPT) [16], heterogeneous networks [17], satellite-based
Internet of Things [18], and radar-communication systems
[19]. Nonetheless, these methods have a high computational
complexity and algorithmic latency caused by, for example,
iterative algorithms and complex matrix computations. In ad-
dition, since these methods attempt to approximate the outage
constraint by ﬁnding the upper bound of outage probability,
2
they usually yield sub-optimal and conservative solutions as
well. Finally, for multi-user multi-input single-output (MU-
MISO) systems, these methods may obtain high-rank solutions
due to semideﬁnite relaxation, which cannot satisfy the rank-
1 constraint and cannot be decomposed into beamforming
vectors. Although Gaussian randomization procedure [13] may
deal with this problem, it further weakens the optimality of the
solution, increases the computational and delay overhead, and
even obtains non-feasible solutions for the outage constraint.
In recent years, deep learning-based beamforming ap-
proaches have been increasingly investigated. It uses deep
neural networks (DNNs) to approximate the mapping of inputs
and optimal solutions of traditional optimization algorithms,
thus bypassing the tedious iterative solution process and han-
dling non-convex optimization problems with ease. Compared
to purely data-driven methods, the data- and model-driven
learning method can effectively improve the training efﬁciency
and performance of neural networks, and has a wide range of
applications in the ﬁeld of wireless communications, such as
transceiver design in over-the-air federated learning [20], and
computation ofﬂoading in mobile-edge computing networks
[21]. As for beamforming optimization, we proposed a model-
driven learning approach for MU-MISO systems with the aid
of a convolutional neural network (CNN) in [22], where the
CNN’s output dimension is reduced by adopting an optimal
beamforming structure [23]. We further used this method
for the case of the absence of uplink and downlink channel
reciprocity as in [24]. This approach is then widely extended
for applications in DNN-based optimal beamforming designs
such as universal power MISO beamforming [25], scalable
beamforming optimization though graph neural network [26],
and multi-user mutli-input mutli-output precoding [31]. In
addition to optimal beamforming structures, other types of
mathematical model-driven methods are also used in the
design of beamforming based on perfect CSI. In [27], a deep
unfolding network was proposed, which unfolds the weighted
minimum mean-square error (WMMSE) algorithm [28] for
solving problem sum rate maximization problems and learns
beamforming matrices through neural networks. The method
was further extended to the design of hybrid beamforming in
millimeter-wave systems [29]. In [30], a model GNN was pro-
posed by using ﬁrst-order Taylor’s expansion to approximate
inverse matrices and achieve better performance. However,
these methods are designed with perfect CSI at the trans-
mitters, and cannot directly applied for robust beamforming
optimization.
Meanwhile, many works have emerged for the deep learning
based robust beamforming optimization. The authors in [32]
proposed a DNN-based robust beamforming approach to solve
average sum rate maximization problem in MU-MISO system
under Gaussian channel uncertainties. In [33], a graph neural
network (GNN) based robust beamforming method was pro-
posed with Gaussian channel uncertainties. Nevertheless, these
works did not consider the outage probability performance. In
[34], we proposed a data augmentation based DNN approach
to obtain robust beamforming for the outage constrained power
minimization problem, which achieves better power efﬁciency
and the execution delay. However, this method directly learns
beamforming vectors without dimensional reduction through
the optimal structure, making it hard to train the neural
network. A similar method was presented for MU-MISO
to address the outage-constrained rate quantile maximization
problem in [35], where beamforming vectors are recovered by
the learned power features and the regularized zero-forcing
(RZF) [36], [37] beamforming structure. This scheme reduces
the dimensionality of the output and makes the neural network
easy to train, but sacriﬁces the transmission performance due
to the inferior performance of RZF beamforming.
In this paper, we explore the application of data and
model-driven deep learning as a novel approach to address
two robust beamforming optimization problems in MU-MISO
systems. Our proposed method exhibits improved rate and
power performance in the presence of channel uncertainty.
Additionally, we achieve lower output dimensions to enhance
neural network training efﬁciency and employ a more ﬂexible
neural network structure to accommodate universal transmit
power. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the ﬁrst to
surpass the performance and computational efﬁciency of the
traditional solution presented in [12]. The contributions are
summarized in the following:
• We propose a data and model-driven deep learning ap-
proach to solve the outage-constrained minimum rate
quantile maximization problem, while adhering to the rate
outage probability constraint and the transmit power con-
straint, considering Gaussian channel uncertainties. We
ﬁrst propose a modiﬁed optimal beamforming structure
that introduces new trainable interference features arising
from channel estimation errors. These features, along
with the power features, enhance system performance
while simultaneously reducing the neural network’s out-
put dimension. Furthermore, we introduce a specialized
GNN, as described in [26], to train interference and
power features for improved rate performance, scalability
and generalizability of the neural network. Unlike the
message passing GNN [39] that can only handle homo-
geneous graphs, this GNN realizes the bipartite message-
passing (BMP) inference, which makes it capable of
handling heterogeneous vertex types using different neu-
ral networks. After implementing beamforming recovery
using the modiﬁed optimal structure, we estimate the
rate quantile through data augmentation and Monte Carlo
(MC) sampling. MC sampling is unnecessary for the
inference of robust beamforming, ensuring that it does
not increase the execution time or complexity.
• We further propose a bisection-based deep learning
method to address the robust beamforming design for
the more challenging transmit power minimization prob-
lem with the rate outage probability constraint. Existing
neural network methods, such as those discussed in
[34], pose challenges in training as they require simul-
taneous updating of the neural network parameters and
Lagrange multipliers. To overcome this limitation, we
modify the neural network framework designed for rate
quantile maximization. We incorporate transmit power
as an additional input, enabling the neural network to
3
feature universal transmit power. The trained universal
neural network, in conjunction with the bisection method,
allows us to infer the minimum transmit power that
satisﬁes the outage probability constraints. This leverages
the observation that the transmission rate increases with
higher transmit power.
• Numerical results show that our proposed robust beam-
forming method outperforms state-of-the-art works, in-
cluding the classical optimization method [12], the RZF-
model based learning method [35] and the DNN-based
learning method without assistance of model information,
in terms of achievable robust rate, execution time, power
consumption and feasibility.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. System
model and problem formulation are described in Section II,
after which the model-driven learning approach for the rate
quantile maximization problem is provided in Section III.
Then, the bisection based deep learning approach for the
power minimization problem is given in Section IV. Numerical
results and analysis are provided in Section V, followed by
which we conclude this paper in Section VI.
Notation: Bold uppercase and lowercase letters (e.g., A
and a) represent matrices and column vectors, respectively.
I denotes the identity matrix. The superscripts (·)T and (·)†
stand for transpose and Hermite conjugate transpose of a
matrix or vector, respectively. We use Rm×n and Cm×n to
denote the real and complex space of m by n dimensions,
respectively. Re(·) and Im(·) represent the real and imaginary
parts of a complex variable, respectively. | · | and ∥· ∥refer to
the absolute value operator and the Euclidean norm operator,
respectively. ⌊·⌋and ⌈·⌉denote the ﬂoor and ceil functions (i.e.
the downward and upward rounding operations), respectively.
dim(a) represents the dimension of a vector a.
II. SYSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM FORMULATION
We consider a MU-MISO downlink system in which a BS
with N-antennas serves K single-antenna users. Let N =
{1, · · · , N} and K = {1, · · · , K} denote the antenna set and
the user set, respectively. Suppose xk is the transmit signal to
the user k with unit power and the BS transmits with a total
power P. The transmitted data symbol xk is mapped onto
the antenna array elements by multiplying the beamforming
vector wk ∈CN×1. The received signal at the user k can be
expressed as
yk = h†
kwkxk +
X
j̸=k
h†
kwjxj + nk,
(1)
where hk = [h1k, · · · , hnk, · · · , hNk]T ∈CN×1, and hnk
is the channel between the antenna n at the BS and the
user k. Then, the overall channel matrix can be denoted as
H = [h1, · · · , hK]. nk denotes the additive white Gaussian
noise (AWGN) component with zero mean and variance σ2
k.
Therefore, the signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR)
that measures quality of the data detection at the k-th user is
given by
Γk =
|h†
kwk|2
P
j̸=k |h†
kwj|2 + σ2
k
,
(2)
and the corresponding achievable rate is formulated as
Rk = B log2(1 + Γk),
(3)
where B denotes the bandwidth.
Considering that it is hard to obtain perfect CSI at the BS
in practice, the channel error model is given as follows:
hk = ˜hk + ek,
(4)
where ˜hk is the estimated CSI known at the BS, and
ek
=
[e1k, · · · , enk, · · · , eNk]T
∈
CN×1 represents the
channel error. The overall estimated channel matrix and chan-
nel error matrix are denoted as ˜H = [˜h1, · · · , ˜hK] and
E = [e1, · · · , eK], respectively. The commonly used Gaussian
channel error is adopted to model ek, where each element of
ek independently identically distributed follows CN(0, σ2
e).
We ﬁrst focus on the minimum rate quantile maximization
problem, i.e., maximizing the corresponding quantile while
satisfying the minimum rate outage probability constraint and
the BS transmit power constraint. Note that the minimum rate
(denoted as Rmin = mink∈K Rk) is the minimum achievable
rate among all users. This problem is given as follows:
P1:
max
wk,∀K r
(5)
s.t.
Prob
 Rmin ≤r

≤ρ
(6)
Rmin ≤Rk, ∀k ∈K
(7)
K
X
k=1
∥wk∥2 ≤P,
(8)
where (6) refers to the outage constraint, and ρ is the target
outage probability which often has a low value (e.g., 5%). (8)
denotes the power constraint at the BS and P is the maximum
transmit power of the BS.
Another conventional but more challenging problem consid-
ered in this paper is the power minimization problem based
on the minimum rate outage probability constraint, which is
given by
P2:
min
wk,∀K
K
X
k=1
∥wk∥2
(9)
s.t.
Prob
 Rmin ≤r

≤ρ
Rmin ≤Rk, ∀k ∈K.
Obviously, the optimization problems P1 and P2 are both
nonconvex and difﬁcult to solve. The traditional method
solves such problems through jointly using convex restriction
approach and semi-positive deﬁnite optimization (see [12]).
However, it suffers from a long convergence time and high-
rank solutions. Although the Gaussian randomization proce-
dure [13] claims to be able to solve the high-rank matrix issue
which is not designed for the outage constrained problem, it is
shown in our simulations that this method can yield infeasible
solutions to the above outage-constrained problems with a
higher probability. Therefore, we will present the proposed
data and model-driven deep learning approach to solve P1
and P2, achieving faster convergence and better performance.
4
III. RATE QUANTILE MAXIMIZATION
In this section, we provide a deep leaning approach for
the rate quantile maximization problem (i.e., P1) via an
unsupervised learning manner. Suppose there exists a function
Ψ1(·) with its input being the estimated channel information
and its output being an optimal robust beamforming solution
that satisﬁes the constraints in problem P1. Then, the problem
P1 can be rewritten as follows:
{w1, · · · , wK} = Ψ1(˜h1, · · · , ˜hK).
(10)
Normally, the closed-form expression for function Ψ1(·) does
not exist. Fortunately, the universal approximation theorem
[38] has veriﬁed that any continuous-valued functions can be
approximated with very small approximation error through a
well-designed DNN. Thus, the original problem can be turned
into a trainable problem. Assume there is a DNN Ψ1(·; Θ)
with trainable parameter set Θ, which has the ability to
approximate (10) as follows:
{w1, · · · , wK} = Ψ1(˜h1, · · · , ˜hK; Θ).
(11)
This allows us to learn the parameter set Θ to obtain robust
solutions for the problem P1, which is more tractable than the
original problem.
Different from commonly used data driven learning, we
propose a model-based beamforming structure to deal with
channel uncertainties, which together with data samples speeds
up training the neural network. Then, we employ a unique
GNN combined with MC sampling to realize a robust beam-
forming optimization while satisfying the outage probability
constraint and the power constraint.
A. Model-based Beamforming Structure
With the known CSI at the BS, we have previously proposed
a hybrid supervised and model-based deep learning method in
[24] with the aid of the optimal beamforming structure [23],
which is given below
wk = √pk
 I + PK
j=1
qj
σ2
j hjh†
j
−1hk

 I + PK
j=1
qj
σ2
j hjh†
j
−1hk

,
(12)
where pk, qk are non-negative trainable parameters and sat-
isfy PK
k=1 pk = PK
k=1 qk = P. p = [p1, · · · , pK]T
∈
RK×1 denotes the downlink power allocation vector, and
q = [q1, · · · , qK]T ∈RK×1 is an auxiliary variable used to
determine the direction of optimal beamforming.
This practice reduces the neural network output dimension
and thus improves the training efﬁciency and accuracy. Unfor-
tunately, this optimal structure cannot be directly applied to
the case of channel uncertainty due to the fact that the neural
network needs to reconstruct the beamforming vectors based
on the known CSI and the learned power parameters. To this
end, we modify the optimal beamforming structure in order to
make it suitable for the case of imperfect CSI. Speciﬁcally, we
introduce a key feature implying the extra interference arising
from channel estimation errors into the optimal beamforming
structure (12). The modiﬁed robust beamforming structure is
given as follows:
ˆwk = √pk

(1 + sk)I + PK
j=1
qj
σ2
j
˜hj ˜h†
j
−1
˜hk


(1 + sk)I + PK
j=1
qj
σ2
j
˜hj ˜h†
j
−1
˜hk

,
(13)
where s = [s1, · · · , sK]T ∈RK×1 can be viewed as the
extra interference caused by the channel estimation error. It
is very difﬁcult to rigorously prove the robust beamforming
structure with outage probabilistic constraints, so a mathemat-
ical interpretation of (13) is provided in the Appendix at the
end of this paper. We denote robust beamforming matrix as
ˆ
W = [ ˆw1, · · · , ˆwK]T . It is worth noting that (13), although
not rigorously mathematically derived, is able to approximate
the value of sk through a neural network description without
the need for its exact expression. This structure enables us to
reconstruct the robust beamforming matrix ˆ
W from the output
[p, q, s] of the neural network when only the estimated CSI
is known, and the output dimension of the neural network is
reduced from 2NK1 to 3K.
B. Bipartite GNN for Feature Learning
In our previous works [22], [34], power features [p, q] can
be learned by a fully connected neural network (FCNN) or
CNN. Considering that GNNs can achieve state of the art
performance, and the potential scalability as well as general-
izability due to their permutation equivariant and permutation
invariant properties [26], [40]–[42], this paper employs a
special bipartite GNN (BGNN) as in [26] to realize the BMP
inference and thus to learn the features in (13). Different with
[26], the weights of the edges in the BGNN are estimated
channel information ˜H rather than perfect channel information
H. Besides, we need not only to learn the power feature [p, q]
with a BGNN, but also to learn the interference feature s
with another BGNN considering the effect of channel errors.
The reason of using two BGNNs to learn the interference
feature s and power features [p, q] separately is due to the
difference in their ranges of values. For narrative simplicity,
in this subsection we use the notation gk to denote the features
of user k learned by the BGNN, which either stands for being
sk ∈R or [pk, qk] ∈R2.
The MU-MISO system can be represented as a weighted
bipartite graph G = (N, K, ˜H), where the N and K respec-
tively stand for disjoint vertex sets of antennas and users,
and estimated channel information ˜H refers to the weight
matrix of all edges, as shown in Fig. 1. Each antenna-user
pair (n, k), ∀n ∈N, ∀k ∈K is connected through an edge
with weight ˜hnk. At this point, we realize the division of the
basic network entity for the MU-MISO system by considering
each antenna of the BS and the user as a vertex. In this paper,
we adopt a deep learning method based on vertices parameter
sharing [26], [43], which facilitates the GNN to satisfy the
desired permutation equivariance properties and is irrelevant to
how the graph is constructed. The basic idea is that each vertex
1Since neural network frameworks such as PyTorch or TensorFlow have
difﬁculty dealing with complex numbers, the complex channel must be divided
into real and imaginary parts.
5
l-th layer
(l+1)-th layer
User Message Generation
Antenna message generation
Feature decision
Antenna 1
Antenna 2
User 1
User 2
Antenna 1
Antenna 2
User 1
User 2
Graph representation 
Combination
Aggregation
Fig. 1. Graph representation and deep learning based BMP inference with N = 2, K = 2.
can complete its own computation independently based on part
of the estimated channel information, and then transfer the
relevant statistics (named as messages) between the vertices
to avoid the lack of overall channel information. By iterating
the this process, the overall computation of the system can be
formed, and ﬁnally the optimal beamforming of the MU-MISO
system can be realized.
The iteration process of vertex parameter sharing for beam-
forming feature calculation can be achieved through the BMP
inference from the literature [26], which deﬁnes three types
of vertex operators, i.e., user message generators C(·), antenna
message generators M(·), and feature decision makers D(·).
We use an L-layer BGNN to realize the BMP inference, where
each layer of the BGNN implements an iteration in the BMP
inference, as shown in Fig. 1. In the following, we will brieﬂy
introduce the deep learning based BMP inference, see [26] for
more details.
Denote the BGNN as Φ( ˜H; Θ) with the trainable parameter
set Θ. In l + 1-th layer of the BGNN, vertex operators C(·),
M(·), and D(·) are respectively implemented by three FCNNs
ΦCl+1(·; ΘCl+1), ΦMl+1(·; ΘMl+1) and ΦDl+1(·; ΘDl+1) as
follows:
c(l+1)
kn
= C

g(l)
k , b(l)
k , ˜hki

= ΦCl+1

g(l)
k , b(l)
k , ˜hkn; ΘCl+1

,
(14)
b(l+1)
nk
= M

m(l)
nk, c(l+1)
n
, ˜hkn

= ΦMl+1

m(l)
nk, c(l+1)
n
, ˜hkn; ΘMl+1

, (15)
g(l+1)
k
= D

m(l+1)
k

= ΦDl+1

m(l+1)
k
; ΘDl+1

,
(16)
where the superscript (·)(l) represents the value of l-th layer.
In the l + 1-th layer, each user vertex has a copy of sub
neural networks ΦCl+1(·; ΘCl+1) and ΦDl+1(·; ΘDl+1), while
each antenna vertex shares the same sub neural network
ΦMl+1(·; ΘMl+1). Therefore, the trainable parameter set of
the BGNN can be denoted as
Θ =

ΘCl, ΘMl, ΘDl, l = 1, · · · , L
	
.
(17)
b(l+1)
k
, m(l+1)
nk
, c(l+1)
n
, and m(l+1)
k
are given below
b(l+1)
k
= P({b(l+1)
nk
, ∀n ∈N}),
(18)
m(l+1)
nk
= {b(l+1)
nk
, P({b(l+1)
nj
, ∀j ̸= k})},
(19)
c(l+1)
n
= P({c(l+1)
kn
, ∀n ∈K}),
(20)
m(l+1)
k
= P({m(l+1)
nk
, ∀n ∈N}),
(21)
where P(·) stands for the well-known sum pooling operator,
which is widely used in existing works [44], [45]. Speciﬁcally,
let µa be a variable of vertex a ∈A, and we use a simpliﬁed
pooling operator as P({µa, ∀a ∈A}) = P
a∈A µa.
There are three main steps in l + 1-th layer of the BGNN,
which are detailed as follows:
(1) User message generation. The user message c(l+1)
kn
∈
RM is generated at user vertex k by (14) and will be forwarded
to the antenna n, where the hyperparameter M is the di-
mension of this message. The neural network ΦCl+1(·; ΘCl+1)
realizes a combine operation of the previous feature deci-
sion g(l)
k , antenna message b(l)
k
∈RM and ˜hkn. Input and
output dimensions of the neural network ΦCl+1(·; ΘCl+1) are
M + 2 + dim(g(l)
k ) and M, where dim(g(l)
k ) = 2 for power
features [pk, qk] and dim(g(l)
k ) = 1 for the interference fea-
ture sk. Therefore, the size of neural network ΦCl+1(·; ΘCl+1)
is decoupled with the network size N and K.
6
a
S-Net
Power-Net
Ascending Order
Beamforming 
Recovery 
Module 
 
s
[p;q]
Testing
Augmented data 
error 
sampling
Estimate      by
(22)
DAQE module
Training
Fig. 2. The proposed overall neural network framework for Ψ1( ˆH; Θ).
(2) Antenna message generation. After receiving user mes-
sages {ckn, ∀k
∈
K}, the antenna vertex n adopts the
aggregation operation to obtain c(l+1)
n
∈
RM via (20).
Then, it generates the antenna message b(l+1)
nk
∈RM by
(15), where the neural network ΦMl+1(·; ΘMl+1) performs
a combination operation on the previous antenna information
m(l)
nk ∈R2M, c(l+1)
n
and ˜hkn. The input and output dimen-
sions of ΦMl+1(·; ΘMl+1) are 3M + 2 and M, respectively.
Subsequently, the antenna vertex n updates m(l+1)
nk
by (19)
and forwards b(l+1)
nk
as well as m(l+1)
nk
to the user vertex k.
(3) Feature decision. The user k aggregates all the received
m(l+1)
nk
, ∀n ∈N to obtain m(l+1)
k
∈R2M by (21), and then
generates the feature decision g(l+1)
k
through ΦDl+1(·; ΘDl+1)
as in (16), without considering the network size N and
K. Besides, it updates b(l+1)
k
by the aggregation operation
according to (18).
Since each layer of the BGNN realizes one iteration of
the BMP inference, through several times of iterations (e.g.,
L), user vertices are able to ﬁnally obtain the converged
gk, ∀k ∈K, which are used to recover the robust beamforming
matrix (13).
C. Overall Neural Network framework
After introducing the BGNN , we provide the overall neural
network framework to address the outage constrained rate
quantile maximization problem P1, as shown in Fig. 2. Specif-
ically, we provide a data augmentation method to estimate the
rate quantile and to gain robust beamforming solutions. The
input of the proposed network is the estimated CSI ˜H with a
dimension of 2NK by splitting the real part Re( ˜H) and the
imaginary part Im( ˜H), and the outputs are the key features of
robust beamforming [s, p, q] with a dimension of 3K in total.
These features are used to recover beamforming solutions, and
together with MC sampling to estimate rate quantile ˆr which
satisﬁed the constraint (6). Four main modules comprise the
proposed network, which are detailed in the following:
• S-Net. This network is designed to learn the interference
component caused by the channel estimation errors, i.e.,
s ∈RK. It can be implemented by the aforementioned
BGNN in Section III-B and is denoted as ΦS( ˜H; ΘS)
with the parameter set ΘS =

ΘS
Cl, ΘS
Ml, ΘS
Dl∀l =
1, · · · , L
	
. The hyperparameter M in S-Net is denoted
MS. The details of the adopted BGNN will be given in
Section V.
• Power-Net. Another BGNN is used to form the Power-
Net, which aims to learn the power features of the
beamforming (namely, p and q). To distinguish it from
the S-Net, we denote Power-Net as ΦP( ˜H; ΘP) with the
parameter set ΘP =

ΘP
Cl, ΘP
Ml, ΘP
Dl∀l = 1, · · · , L
	
.
The hyperparameter M in P-Net is denoted MP.
• Beamforming Recovery (BR) Module. The purpose of
this module is to ﬁnd the robust beamforming matrix ˆ
W
based on (13) from the downlink and virtual uplink power
p and q obtained in Power-Net, the interference feature
s obtained in S-Net, and the estimated CSI ˜H. Note that
this module does not contain parameters to be trained and
optimized.
• Data Augmentation based Quantile Estimation (DAQE)
Module. This module is used to evaluate the rate quantile
ˆr. When we calculate the output ˆ
W in the BR module, the
perfect channel information H is unknown, which fails
to realize the robust design of beamforming. To this end,
we need to calculate the outage performance to obtain the
value of loss function and to evaluate the neural network’s
performance, but the challenge lies in that the outage
constraint (6) does not have a closed-form expression. A
natural idea to solve this challenge is that we may adopt
MC sampling to estimate the value of rate quantile, which
has been widely used in conventional convex optimization
methods as in [46], [47]. This inspired us to provide the
so called data augmentation based quantile estimation
method, as described in Algorithm 1. Speciﬁcally, we
generate a potential channel error set {E1, · · · , EU} with
7
Algorithm 1 Data Augmentation based Quantile Estimation
1: Obtain the estimated channel information ˜H and the learned
beamforming matrix ˆ
W.
2: Generate
U
channel
error
samples
{E1, · · · , EU}
iid
∼
CN(0, σ2
e).
3: Obtain potential actual CSI set {H1, · · · , HU} by (4) and
then calculate the corresponding rate set {Rk,u, ∀k ∈K, u =
1, · · · , U} by (3) with learned ˆ
W.
4: Find the minimum rate set {Rmin,1, · · · , Rmin,U} among all
users, and then sort them in ascending order and yield the set
{Rmin,(1), · · · , Rmin,(U)} , where Rmin,(u) denotes the u-th
smallest element in this set.
5: Estimate the rate quantile ˆr by (22).
U elements through sampling from a certain distribution,
e.g., circularly symmetric complex Gaussian distribution
with zero mean and variance σ2
e. This combined with
the estimated CSI ˜H forms a set of potential actual
channel {H1, · · · , HU} via (4). Then we can calculate
all the possible rate set {Rk,u, ∀k ∈K, u = 1, · · · , U}
given beamforming matrix ˆ
W and the potentially actual
channel set {H1, · · · , HU} through (3). This is followed
by a minimum operation among all users and the min-
imum rate set {Rmin,1, · · · , Rmin,U} is obtained. After
that, we sort them in ascending order and yield the set
{Rmin,(1), · · · , Rmin,(U)} , where Rmin,(u) denotes the
u-th smallest element in this set. Thus, we can estimate
the value of rate quantile ˆr via a linear interpolation
method. To be speciﬁc, after mapping ρ ∈(0, 1) to the
sample indices [0, U], we can ﬁnd the location of quantile
between two samples with indices ⌊ρU⌋and ⌈ρU⌉in the
sorted order, and then we can obtain the rate quantile by
ˆr = Rmin,(⌊Uρ⌋) + β(Rmin,(⌈Uρ⌉) −Rmin,(⌊Uρ⌋)), (22)
where β is the fractional part of the computed quantile
index ρU. In our previous studies, such methods com-
bined with FCNNs have been applied to the beamforming
problem with SINR probabilistic constraints [34], and
to the beamforming problem with SINR and harvested
energy probabilistic constraints in SWIPT systems [48].
Now we could summarize the training and testing strategies
to the proposed neural network. The loss function is deﬁned
as follows:
Loss = −ˆr = −τ
 Ψ1( ˜H; Θ)

,
(23)
where Θ = {ΘS, ΘP} is the overall parameter set. The
function τ(·) deﬁnes a mapping relation from ˆ
W to ˆr and
represents the quantile estimation process of the DAQE mod-
ule.
At the t-th step of the training stage, we generate a mini-
batch set H with the cardinality of |H| as the input of the
neural network, which contains the estimated CSI ˜H. The S-
Net and Power-Net are computed in parallel to get the beam-
forming feature [s, p, q] which together with the estimated CSI
form the robust beamforming matrix ˆ
W. Then, the estimated
rate quantile ˆr can be obtained through the DAQE module,
and −ˆr is used as the loss function deﬁned in (23) to train
the overall neural network by the back-propagation algorithm.
The parameter set Θ can be trained by stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) algorithm [49] or its variants, such as the Adam
algorithm [50], which is updated as follows:
Θ(t) = Θ(t−1) + α
|H|
X
˜H∈H
τ
 ∇ΘΨ1
  ˜H; Θ(t−1)
,
(24)
where α represents the learning rate of the neural network.
Next, we will brieﬂy discuss differentiability of rate quantile
ˆr. The rate function deﬁned in (3) is differentiable with
respect to the output of neural network [s, p, q], which is
also differentiable with respect to the parameter Θ. The MC-
sampling based the quantile value is a convex combination of
the ⌊Uρ⌋-th and ⌈Uρ⌉-th smallest values of sampled min-rate
value, which will not change the differentiability. Therefore,
the estimated quantile is differentiable according to the chain
rule of differentiation.
When it comes to the testing stage, we can obtain the beam-
forming matrix via forward propagation in the well trained
neural network. The DAQE module will not be involved at
this stage, which means that we do not need to perform MC
sampling to obtain this robust beamforming matrix, reducing
the latency of the algorithm. The computational complexity
of neural network inference is analyzed as follows. Assume
that the FCNN on each vertex has only one hidden layer
with number of neurons z. The computational complexity of
a BGNN is O(LNKzM). The computational complexity of
beamforming recovery by (13) is dominated by the inverse
operation, which is O(KN 3). Therefore, the total inference
complexity for problem P1 is O(LNKz(MS +MP)+KN 3).
IV. POWER MINIMIZATION USING BISECTION ALGORITHM
Using deep learning method to deal with the power mini-
mization problem with the outage-based constraint (i.e., P2) is
more challenging, because it encounters MC sampling of many
variables and frequent Lagrange multipliers updating, which
increase the computational and latency overhead of training
stage, as in our previous work [34]. Another problem need
to be addressed is that traditional deep learning methods are
trained for a ﬁxed transmit power, resulting in the lack of
scalability of the neural network. In practice, a ﬁxed power
is unrealistic, and should vary within a certain range in
accordance with different network topologies and power opti-
mization schemes. For instance, the heterogeneous network
may includes macro-, micro- and pico-cells with different
transmit power budgets [51], and a BS will adaptively adjust its
maximum transmit power according to its access user number
and service requirements to reduce energy consumption. To
this end, we ﬁrst extend the above-mentioned neural network
framework to incorporate the feature of universal power.
Then, we propose a bisection-based approach to the power
minimization problem.
A. Neural Network with Universal Power
To achieve robust beamforming optimization with universal
power budget, an intuitive but inefﬁcient idea is that we could
train multiple DNNs for various transmission power level. This
practice obviously suffers from high computational complexity
8
S-Net
Power-Net
Beamforming 
Recovery 
Module 
s
[p;q]
DAQE
module 
Fig. 3. Modiﬁed framework for Ψ2( ˜H, P ; Θ).
and storage, thus hindering the implementation of these DNNs.
To address this challenge, we take the transmit power as
an additional input for the proposed neural network, which
is similar as the work for beamforming design with perfect
CSI [25]. The modiﬁed neural network can be represented as
follows:
{w1, · · · , wK} = Ψ2( ˜H, P; Θ),
(25)
where Ψ2( ˜H, P; Θ) has a similar network framework as
Ψ1( ˜H; Θ), except that the transmit power budget is added
as an input. The Loss function of Ψ2( ˜H, P; Θ) is Loss =
−ˆr = −τ
 Ψ2( ˜H; Θ)

. The architecture of the modiﬁed
neural network Ψ2( ˜H, P; Θ) is shown in Fig. 3.
To be speciﬁc, inputs of the modiﬁed neural network include
the estimated CSI and the transmit power, with the total
dimension of 2NK + 1. Transmit power can be viewed as
a random variable and is uniformly sampled from a speciﬁc
range of power variations, namely, P
∼Uniform(P, ¯P),
where P and ¯P denote the potential minimum and maximum
transmit power level, respectively. Then, [s, p, q] can be
learned from the S-Net and Power-Net with a total output
dimension of 3K for the universal power. Note that in order
to satisfy the power constraint, the output of Power-Net needs
to be normalized , i.e., PK
k=1 pk = PK
k=1 qk = 1, which are
then scaled to the total transmit power P in the beamforming
recovery module. In this way, we can evaluate the maximum
rate quantile ˆr that stands for the maximum achievable rate
while satisfying the outage constraint.
B. Bisection Algorithm
Since the sum rate of the MU-MISO system increases
monotonically with the increasing transmission power of the
BS, we can use the bisection method to ﬁnd the minimum
transmit power from the potential power region. This motivates
us to solve the power minimization problem P2 by the
bisection method with the aid of the improved neural network
proposed in the previous sub-section, as shown in Algorithm 2.
Let us ﬁrst set a range of possible transmit power [P, ¯P] and
a minimum rate target r, and use a trained universal power
neural network to infer the maximum rate quantile ˆr. We
utilize bisection to ﬁnd the minimum power until the iterative
algorithm stopping condition (e.g., |ˆr −r| ≤ε) is satisﬁed,
where ε is an arbitrarily small positive number. It is worth
noting that in this process, the neural network does not need to
be retrained due to its power universal property, so this method
Algorithm 2 The bisection method based power minimization
algorithm
1: Initial upper and lower limits of total transmit power ¯P and P,
target minimum rate r, the outage probability requirement ρ, and
stopping threshold ε.
2: while |ˆr −r| ≤ε do
3:
P = P + ¯
P
2
;
4:
Obtain ˆr and ˆ
W by the modiﬁed network (Ψ2) inference with
input P .
5:
if ˆr < r then
6:
P = P
7:
else
8:
P = ¯P
9:
end if
10: end while
11: return W∗= ˆ
W.
only increases the computational overhead of the bisection
method, which is often considered to be an efﬁcient method.
Let us now summarize the training and testing strategies
of the modiﬁed neural network to solve power minimization
problem P2. During the training stage, a mini-batch set H with
the cardinality of |H| containing numerous estimated CSI and
transmit power is generated for learning the parameter set,
which can be updated as follows:
Θ(t) = Θ(t−1) + α
|H|
X
{ ˜H,P }∈H
∇Θτ
 Ψ2
  ˜H, P; Θ(t−1)
.
(26)
Once the network Ψ2 is trained, we can use it combined with
bisection algorithm to infer the the solution of P2. Note that
unlike solving P1, the bisection method requires the use of
estimated rate quantile ˆr when solving problem P2, where
MC sampling is essential and will increase the computation
complexity. The computation complexity of rate quantile es-
timation and bisection algorithm are O(U log2(U)KN) and
log2
  ¯
P −P
ε

, respectively. Therefore, the total complexities to
solve problem P2 is O
 log2
  ¯
P −P
ε

LNKz(MS + MP) +
KN 3 + U log2(U)KN

. However, the execution time of
this method is still much shorter than that of traditional
optimization algorithms, and this will be demonstrated in
Section V.
V. NUMERICAL RESULTS
In this section, we provide numerical results to validate and
evaluate the performance of the proposed deep learning-based
robust beamforming approach. For the sake of comparison, we
adopt the same parameter setting as [35]. Unless otherwise
speciﬁed, we consider a MU-MISO system consisting of
N = 4 transmit antennas and K = 4 users. Rayleigh fading
is used to model the estimated MISO channel ˜H, where each
single link (from an antenna to a user) follows a circularly
symmetric complex Gaussian distribution with zero mean and
unit variance, namely, hnk ∼CN(0, 1), ∀n ∈N, ∀k ∈K.
The total bandwidth B = 10 MHz, the transmission power
P = 30 dBm, and the variance of channel estimation error
σ2
e = 0.075. Considering path loss and inter-cell interfer-
ence, we set the noise power spectral density (PSD) to -75
dBm/Hz. The statistical performance requirement induced by
9
TABLE I
THE ARCHITECTURE AND PARAMETERS OF FCNNS.
ΦS
Cl(·; ΘS
Cl).
Layers
Input dimension
Output dimension
Dense + ReLu
MS + 3
200
Dense + Tanh
200
MS
ΦP
Cl(·; ΘP
Cl).
Layers
Input dimension
Output dimension
Dense + ReLu
MP + 4
200
Dense + Tanh
200
MP
ΦS
Ml(·; ΘS) and ΦP
Ml(·; ΘP).
Layers
Input dimension
Output dimension
Dense + ReLu
3M + 2
200
Dense + Tanh
200
M
Note: M = MS for ΦS
Ml, and M = MP for ΦP
Ml
ΦS
Dl(·; ΘS
Dl).
Layers
Input dimension
Output dimension
Dense + ReLu
2MS + 1
200
Dense
200
1
ΦP
Dl(·; ΘP
Dl).
Layers
Input dimension
Output dimension
Dense + ReLu
2MP + 1
200
Dense + Softmax
200
2
the channel uncertainties is set as the largest outage probability
ρ = 0.05. All simulation results are generated by using a
computer with an Intel i7-7700 CPU and an NVIDIA Titan
Xp GPU. Note that we also used the neural network design
with universal power (same as the method in Section IV) for
Ψ1( ˆH; Θ) in our simulations to allow it to adapt to different
transmit powers. We use two BGNNs with L = 5 layers
to respectively implement S-Net and Power-Net, where the
FCNN is adopted to construct the DNN of all vertices. The
architecture and parameters of neural networks are given in
TABLE I. The hyperparameters MS and MP are set as 3
and 5, respectively. The rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) function
is used to be the activation function at all hidden layers
of FCNNs. The activation function at the hidden layer of
all DNNs is the rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) function. The
hyperbolic tangent (Tanh) and Softmax functions are used
to be the activation functions at the output layer of FCNNs
accordingly. Since we take the transmit power as an additional
input, the input dimensions of ΦS
Dl(·; ΘS
Dl) and ΦP
Dl(·; ΘP
Dl)
are to 2MS+1 and 2MP +1, respectively. The initialization of
messages deﬁned in Section III-B is realized by independently
sampling from the Gaussian distribution with zero mean and
unit variance.
The neural network Ψ1( ˜H; Θ) for problem P1 is trained
using over 150 epochs with early stopping according to the
validation at the end of each epoch. The batch size is 100.
105 training data and 2 × 103 testing data are used. To realize
the data augmentation, U = 1000 channel errors are sampled
from the circularly symmetric complex Gaussian distribution,
which then form the 1000 true channels based on (4). Then,
we can obtain the rate quantile estimation ˆr through the
DAQE module. The P is uniformly sampled a special power
5
10
15
20
25
30
Transmit Power (dBm)
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Achievable Robust Rate (Mbps)
Fig. 4. The achievable robust data rate against the transmit power.
range, i.e., P ∼Uniform(P, ¯P). We set P = 0 dBm and
¯P = 35 dBm. Adam algorithm [50] with a learning rate
α = 10−3 is used for the training of both neural networks.
The training of Ψ2( ˜H, P; Θ) for problem P2 is similar with
that of Ψ1( ˜H; Θ).
The following benchmark schemes are considered for com-
parison:
• The traditional optimization approach: speciﬁcally,
we use BTI method as described in [12] to obtain the
solution via CVX [52], which achieves the superior robust
performance among existing methods.
• The traditional optimization by evaluation: note that
the obtained solution of [12] is conservative, and therefore
the achievable rate performance evaluated by the MC
method is usually better than the optimized solution. We
use ‘by Evaluation’ to denote the actual achievable rate
performance.
• The DNN with power optimization only approach
[35]: it adopts RZF beamforming structure to reduce the
output dimension of neural network. The rate quantile is
also obtained by MC sampling.
• The DNN method: the neural network directly learns
the
ˆ
W rather than the features of any beamforming
structure, which is a purely data-driven method and
requires frequent updating the Lagrange multipliers.
• The proposed solution with sk
=
0: to evaluate
the impact of the interference features in (13) on the
communication performance, we set sk, ∀k ∈K to 0 in
S-Net of the proposed method.
A. Results of Rate Quantile Maximization Problem P1
Fig. 4 shows that the achievable robust data rate increases
with the increasing transmit power. The proposed method
achieves the highest robust data rate among all considered
methods. For instance, when the transmit power equals 30
dBm, the robust rate of the proposed method reaches about
10.9 Mbps, around 14% higher than the traditional optimiza-
tion method. The reason for this result is that the traditional
optimization methods use convex approximations such as
convex restrictions and semideﬁnite programming, which loses
10
5
10
15
20
25
30
Transmit Power (dBm)
100
101
102
103
104
105
Time required (ms)
Traditional Optimization
Proposed Solution
Fig. 5.
Comparison of execution time of different rate maximization algo-
rithms.
the global optimality. Interestingly, the traditional optimization
algorithm actually computes a conservative solution which
actually performs better. We adopt the MC method to evaluate
the traditional optimization method and found that it achieves
about 0.7 Mbps higher data rate than the traditional optimiza-
tion method, but still lower than the proposed method. The
proposed method with sk = 0 obtains a lower robust rate
performance, which implies that learning interference features
(i.e., sk, ∀K) can indeed achieve performance improvement.
The rate of the DNN method is much lower than above four
methods because it only use data driven learning and thus
is hard to improve the performance of the neural network.
The DNN with power optimization only method recovers the
beamforming matrix via the learned power features and RZF
beamforming model. Since the RZF beamforming only focuses
on interference cancellation and ignores the impact of noise.
In contrast, other methods use either the optimal structure or
the rate-oriented optimization, and thus the DNN with power
optimization only method obtains the lowest robust data rate.
Fig. 5 depicts the comparison between the traditional op-
timization method and our proposed method in terms of
execution time under various transmit power. Our proposed
method has a fairly low execution latency of about 10 to
15 ms, which is about 1000 times lower than the traditional
optimization method. The reasons for this phenomenon lie in
multiple folds. Our proposed method only needs to use the
learned network to infer the optimal solution. In contrast, the
traditional optimization method involves many iterations to
obtain the solution, and loads of matrix operations (such as
ﬁnding the relaxation matrices for convex restriction) in each
iteration. Once it obtains the rank-1 solution, the beamforming
vectors for each user is obtained via matrix factorization due
to the limits of semideﬁnite programming. If the solution
suffers from high-rank, the Gaussian randomization procedure
is required to obtain approximate beamforming vectors, which
further deteriorates the rate performance, the algorithm’s exe-
cution time and even feasibility of the solution. Table II shows
the probability of getting high-rank solutions for the rate quan-
tile maximization problem, and we found that this probability
rises with increasing transmit power. When P = 30 dBm,
0
5
10
15
20
25
Achievable Rate (Mbps)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
CDF of Achievable Rate
Proposed Solution
Traditinal Optimization by Evaluation
5% outage
Fig. 6.
CDF of the achievable robust data rate for the rate maximization
solution.
TABLE II
THE PROBABILITY OF HIGH-RANK SOLUTION FOR THE RATE
MAXIMIZATION PROBLEM.
Power
5
10
15
30
Probability
0.2520
0.6375
0.8060
0.8965
obtaining a high-rank solution is a high probability event, i.e.
89.65%. This is in line with our previous observations in Fig.
4 and Fig. 5 about the deterioration of data rate performance
and algorithm execution latency due to high-rank solutions for
traditional optimization methods. In these cases, we choose
the beamforming directions as the principal eigenvectors of
the high-rank solution, and then optimize the power only.
Fig. 6 compares the cumulative distribution function (CDF)
of achievable robust rate between the proposed solution and
the traditional optimization approach by evaluation. Since the
traditional optimization approach may suffer from the high-
rank solutions, for comparative fairness, we choose a channel
realization that the traditional approach gives a rank-1 solution.
Then, to evaluate the robust rate, we generate 2000 channel
error samples to estimate the robust rate at outage probability
of 5%. The result shows that given the 5% outage constraint,
the achievable rate of the proposed solution reaches 10 Mbps,
about 2 Mbps higher than that of the traditional optimization
approach by evaluation. From another point of view, if a 10
Mbps achievable robust rate is desired, the outage probability
of traditional method is as high as about 40%, where such
solutions cannot be applied in a practical system. In contrary,
the proposed solution can satisfy the outage requirement 5%.
It is worth emphasizing that the comparison environment we
set up is very favorable to traditional optimization methods,
which avoid the high-rank challenge, as well as using MC
estimation instead of the original algorithmic results employed
in the comparison of most works. Despite this, our proposed
method still achieves better performance.
In the above simulations, the path loss and inter-cell in-
terference are combined to PSD (i.e., -75 dBm), where a
similar approach is used in [12] and [35]. Fig. 7 shows the
achievable robust data rate with the increasing transmit power
11
10
15
20
25
30
Transmit Power (dBm)
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Achievable Robust Rate (Mbps)
Large scale fading
Traditional Optimization
Traditional Optimization by Evaluation
Proposed Solution
Fig. 7. The achievable robust data rate against the transmit power with large
scale fading.
6
7
8
9
Number of antennas
80%
85%
90%
95%
100%
105%
Achievable Robust Rate Percentage
Traditional Optimization
Traditional Optimization by Evaluation
Proposed Solution
Generalized from Proposed Solution
Fig. 8. The scalability and generalizability of the proposed method.
under large-scale fading. Speciﬁcally, the path loss is modeled
as 128.1 + 37.6 log10(d) where d is the distance in kilometer
between the BS and a user. Users are uniformly located in an
area between 100 and 500 meters from the BS. The small-scale
fading follows the Rayleigh distribution with zero mean and
unit variance. Simulation results again show that our proposed
method is able to achieve better robust rate performance.
Fig. 8 depicts the scalability and generalizability of the
proposed method for a 4-user system, where the number of
transmit antennas is varied from 6 to 9. MS = 3 and MP = 8
are chosen as hyperparameters for the neural network. The
robust rates of all methods are normalized by the rate of the
traditional optimization by evaluation method for the same
system parameters, and the corresponding ratios are expressed
as percentages. Our proposed method consistently outper-
forms traditional optimization (and by evaluation) methods
in terms of robust rate performance under different sizes of
communication systems, demonstrating excellent scalability.
In order to describe the generalizability of the proposed
method, we ﬁrst train the neural network for the system size
of N = 6, K = 4, and use the trained network for a larger
number of transmit antennas at the BS, where systems with
N ∈[7, 9] were not trained by the neural network. The curve
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Rate Target (Mbps)
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Transmit power (dBm)
Traditional Optimization
Proposed Solution
Fig. 9. The minimum transmit power against the data rate requirements.
marked with “generalized from proposed solution” describes
the generalizability performance of the above simulation. It
can be seen that the robust beamforming rate of the generalized
from proposed solution outperforms traditional optimization
(and by evaluation) methods at N = 7 and 8. At N = 9, it
achieves only slightly worse performance than the traditional
optimization by evaluation method, but still outperforms the
traditional optimization method.
B. Results of Power Minimization Problem P2
Fig. 9 shows the transmit power versus required robust rate
requirements. With the increasing rate requirements, larger
transmit power is needed. The proposed method saves more
power compared with the traditional optimization method. For
instance, when rate target is equal to 10 Mbps, the power
consumption of the proposed method is around 11 dBm, 2.2
dBm lower than the traditional optimization method. In many
cases, there is no feasible solution for given rate and outage
constraints, so the power shown is only averaged over those
feasible solutions.
Fig. 10 depicts the probability of obtaining feasible solu-
tions which satisfy the outage constraint in P2. The feasi-
bility of both methods decreases with the increasing target
rate, because higher rate targets will cause more outage.
The robust beamforming solutions of our proposed approach
have much higher feasibility probabilities than the traditional
optimization approach. For instance, when the rate target is
equal to 10 Mbps, the proposed approach can get robust
solutions with about 60% feasibility, 30% higher than the
traditional optimization method. This is because the solution
obtained by the traditional optimization method using convex
restriction and semideﬁnite relaxation is conservative and
thus this method restricts the solution space and reduces the
chance of obtaining feasible solutions. In addition, when high-
rank solutions are obtained by semideﬁnite relaxation, it is
in general difﬁcult to ﬁnd a feasible beamforming solution
that satisﬁes the outage probability constraints. In contrast,
our method utilizes neural networks to optimize the robust
beamforming, which can explore a much larger solution space
12
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Rate Target (Mbps)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Feasibility with Probablistic Rate constraints
Traditional Optimization
Proposed Solution
Fig. 10. Feasibility probability of the solutions versus rate target.
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Rate Target (Mbps)
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Time required (ms)
Traditional Optimization
Proposed Solution
Fig. 11.
Comparison of execution time of different power minimization
algorithms.
and produce less conservative solutions, thus making it easier
to ensuring feasibility.
Fig. 11 shows the comparison of execution time between the
proposed method and the traditional optimization method for
the power minimization problem under different rate targets.
The proposed solution spends much more time on the power
minimization problems than the rate maximization problem
because it uses bisection search and in each iteration, and
it requires MC method to evaluate the rate quantile value.
However, it still spends much less time than the traditional
optimization method. For instance, when the rate target is
equal to 10 Mbps, the execution time of the proposed method
is about 500 ms less than that of the traditional optimization
method. Besides, the execution time of the proposed method
decreases with the increasing target rates, because the bisection
method can identify the infeasible solution early to avoid
unnecessary iterations. Table III depicts the probability of
high-rank solutions of the traditional optimization method for
the power minimization problems.
In Fig. 12, again we choose a channel for which the
traditional optimization gives a rank-1 solution and compare
the CDF and the power consumption. The rate requirement
is 10 Mbps. The results are interesting: ﬁrst, veriﬁes that
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Achievable Rate (Mbps)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
CDF of Achievable Rate
Proposed Solution. Required power 3.57 dBm.
Traditinal Optimization by Evaluation. Required power 9.41 dBm
5% outage
Fig. 12. CDF of the achievable robust data rate for the power minimization
solution.
TABLE III
THE PROBABILITY OF HIGH-RANK SOLUTION FOR THE POWER
MINIMIZATION PROBLEM.
Rate (Mbps)
5.86
7.06
10
11.76
Probability
0.1149
0.1577
0.1573
0.1479
the traditional is conservative which means it achieves higher
than 10 Mbps at outage of 5% while our proposed solution
can achieve exactly 10 Mbps, avoiding waste of resources;
second, our solution also uses nearly 6 dBm less power, which
conﬁrms its efﬁciency in using limited resources to achieve
better and more robust solutions.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
This paper proposed a data and model-driven learning
approach to address robust beamforming optimization for
the MU-MISO system, considering Gaussian channel uncer-
tainties. The paper investigated two optimization problems
with the outage probability constraint: the rate quantile max-
imization problem and the power minimum problem. For the
rate quantile maximization problem, we proposed a model-
driven learning approach combined with data augmentation
to handle the challenging outage constraint. The modiﬁed
robust beamforming structure is employed to reduce the neural
network’s output dimension from 2NK to 3K. For the power
minimum problem, we introduced a bisection-based learning
method by incorporating the transmit power budget into the
input of the proposed neural network, achieving the feature
of universal transmit power. Numerical results demonstrated
that the proposed approach outperforms state-of-the-art coun-
terparts in terms of rate improvement, power reduction, and
execution time.
APPENDIX
MATHEMATICAL INTERPRETATION OF (13)
The overall neural network framework illustrated in Fig. 2
of the manuscript solves the robust beamforming design based
on outage constraints in the following two steps.
13
• Neural networks (including S-Net and Power-Net) to-
gether with beamforming recovery model obtain optimal
beamforming for generalized problems, where the outage
probability constraint and the minimum rate are not
involved here. Denote Γk as the SINR at user k, and
the generalized problems corresponding to P1 and P2
are respectively given as follows:
E1: max
wk,∀K f(Γ1, · · · , ΓK)
s.t.
K
X
k=1
∥wk∥2 ≤P, (27)
E2: min
wk,∀K
K
X
k=1
∥wk∥2
s.t.
Rk ≥r,
(28)
where f(·) stands for an arbitrary utility function that is
strictly increasing in each user’s SINR as deﬁned in [23].
• The DAQE module estimates the quantile of the minimum
rate among users ˆr which satisﬁes the outage constraint.
By using −ˆr as the loss function, the neural network
gradually learns to output beamforming that can satisfy
the outage probability constraints during training until
convergence.
We then explore expressions for the optimal solution struc-
ture for E1 and E2 taking into account the channel error.
According to [23], [53], the optimal beamforming solution for
E2 is also the optimal solution for E1, so we use E2 to deduce
the robust optimal beamforming structure. The constraints of
E2 can be recast as:
Γk =
|h†
kwk|2
P
j̸=k |h†
kwj|2 + σ2
k
≥2r/B −1 ≜γ (29)
⇔
1
γσ2
k
|h†
kwk|2 ≥
X
j̸=k
1
σ2
k
|h†
kwj|2 + 1.
(30)
Obviously, the strong duality and Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT)
conditions are held for problem E2 [54], so we consider the
Lagrangian function as
L(w1, · · · , wK, q1, · · · , qk)
=
K
X
k=1
∥wk∥2 +
K
X
k=1
qk
 X
j̸=k
1
σ2
k
|h†
kwj|2 + 1
−1
γσ2
k
|h†
kwk|2

,
(31)
where qk, ∀K is the Lagrange multiplier. Based on KKT
conditions, the optimal solution will satisfy
∂L
∂wk = 0. Then
we have
wk +
X
j̸=k
qj
σ2
j
hjh†
jwk −qk
γσ2
k
hkh†
kwk = 0
(a)
⇔
w†
k +
X
j̸=k
qj
σ2
j
w†
kh†
jhj −qk
γσ2
k
w†
kh†
khk = 0T (32)
where (a) holds because the conjugate transpose is taken
simultaneously for both sides of (32). Consider hj = ˜hj +ej,
we have
h†
jhj = ˜h†
j ˜hj + 2Re
 ˜h†
jej

+ e†
jej
|
{z
}
denote as βj∈R
.
(33)
Substituting (33) into (32), we obtain
w†
k +
X
j̸=k
qj
σ2
j
w†
k(˜h†
j ˜hj + βj) −qk
γσ2
k
w†
k(˜h†
k˜hk + βk)
= 0T
(34)
(a)
⇔
w†
k

I +
K
X
j=1
qj
σ2
j
˜h†
j ˜hj +
 K
X
j=1
qj
σ2
j
βj −qk
σ2
k

1 + 1
γ

βk

|
{z
}
denote as sk∈R
I

= qk
σ2
k

1 + 1
γ

w†
k˜h†
k˜hk
(35)
(b)
⇔
wk =
 1 + sk

I +
K
X
j=1
qj
σ2
j
˜hj ˜h†
j
−1
˜hk
× qk
σ2
k

1 + 1
γ

˜h†
kwk
|
{z
}
=scalar
,
(36)
where (a) is held by adding term
qk
σ2
k w†
k˜h†
k˜hk to both side
of (34), and (b) is established by taking conjugate trans-
pose of (35) and left multiplying the inverse matrix of
 1 + sk

I + PK
j=1
qj
σ2
j
˜hj ˜h†
j. Note that
qk
σ2
k

1 + 1
γ

˜h†
kwk is
a scalar, so the optimal wk must be parallel to
 1 + sk

I +
PK
j=1
qj
σ2
j
˜hj ˜h†
j
−1
˜hk. In view of this, the optimal robust
beamforming vectors have the following structures:
˜wk = √pk

(1 + sk)I + PK
j=1
qj
σ2
j
˜hj ˜h†
j
−1
˜hk


(1 + sk)I + PK
j=1
qj
σ2
j
˜hj ˜h†
j
−1
˜hk

,
(37)
where pk is the beamforming power for user k.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Zheng, K. -K. Wong and T. -S. Ng, “Throughput Maximization in
Linear Multiuser MIMO-OFDM Downlink Systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 1993-1998, May 2008.
[2] D. Gesbert, M. Kountrious, C.-B. Chae, R. W. Heath, Jr., and T. Salzer,
“Shifting the MIMO Paradigm," IEEE Signal Processing Mag., vol. 24,
no. 5, pp. 36-46, Sep. 2007
[3] Y. Zhang and C. Tepedelenlioglu, “Transmit Beamforming with Power
Adaptation in Downlink Multi-User Systems,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 2424-2429, Aug. 2010.
[4] Q. Shi, M. Razaviyayn, M. Hong and Z. -Q. Luo, “SINR Constrained
Beamforming for a MIMO Multi-User Downlink System: Algorithms
and Convergence Analysis,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process, vol. 64, no.
11, pp. 2920-2933, Jun. 2016.
[5] S. -J. Kim, A. Magnani, A. Mutapcic, S. P. Boyd and Z. -Q. Luo, “Robust
Beamforming via Worst-Case SINR Maximization,” IEEE Trans. Signal
Process, vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 1539-1547, Apr. 2008.
[6] Z. L. Yu, W. Ser, M. H. Er, Z. Gu and Y. Li, “Robust Adaptive
Beamformers Based on Worst-Case Optimization and Constraints on
Magnitude Response,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process, vol. 57, no. 7, pp.
2615-2628, Jul. 2009.
[7] C. Li, C. He, L. Jiang and F. Liu, “Robust Beamforming Design for
Max–Min SINR in MIMO Interference Channels,”
IEEE Commun.
Lett., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 724-727, Apr. 2016.
14
[8] B. Zhang, Z. He, K. Niu and L. Zhang, “Robust Linear Beamforming
for MIMO Relay Broadcast Channel With Limited Feedback,”
IEEE
Signal Process Lett., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 209-212, Feb. 2010.
[9] M. Medra, Y. Huang and T. N. Davidson, “Offset-Based Beamforming:
A New Approach to Robust Downlink Transmission,” IEEE Trans.
Signal Process, vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 70-82, 1 Jan. 2019.
[10] C. Lin, C. -J. Lu and W. -H. Chen, “Outage-Constrained Coor-
dinated Beamforming With Opportunistic Interference Cancellation,”
IEEE Trans. Signal Process, vol. 62, no. 16, pp. 4311-4326, Aug. 2014.
[11] W. -C. Li, T. -H. Chang, C. Lin and C. -Y. Chi, “Coordinated Beam-
forming for Multiuser MISO Interference Channel Under Rate Outage
Constraints,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process, vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 1087-1103,
Mar. 2013.
[12] K. -Y. Wang, A. M. -C. So, T. -H. Chang, W. -K. Ma and C. -Y. Chi,
“Outage Constrained Robust Transmit Optimization for Multiuser MISO
Downlinks: Tractable Approximations by Conic Optimization,” IEEE
Trans. Signal Process, vol. 62, no. 21, pp. 5690-5705, Nov. 2014.
[13] Z. -Q. Luo, W. -K. Ma, A. M. -C. So, Y. Ye and S. Zhang, “Semideﬁnite
Relaxation of Quadratic Optimization Problems,” IEEE Signal Process
Mag., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 20-34, May 2010.
[14] S. H. Low, “Convex Relaxation of Optimal Power Flow—Part I:
Formulations and Equivalence,” IEEE Trans. Control Netw. Syst., vol.
1, no. 1, pp. 15-27, Mar. 2014.
[15] Y. Sun, K. An, J. Luo, Y. Zhu, G. Zheng and S. Chatzinotas, “Outage
Constrained Robust Beamforming Optimization for Multiuser IRS-
Assisted Anti-Jamming Communications With Incomplete Information,”
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 15, pp. 13298-13314, Aug. 2022.
[16] B. Su, Q. Ni and W. Yu, “Robust Transmit Beamforming for SWIPT-
Enabled Cooperative NOMA With Channel Uncertainties,” IEEE Trans.
Commun., vol. 67, no. 6, pp. 4381-4392, Jun. 2019.
[17] K. -Y. Wang, N. Jacklin, Z. Ding and C. -Y. Chi, “Robust MISO
Transmit Optimization under Outage-Based QoS Constraints in Two-
Tier Heterogeneous Networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol.
12, no. 4, pp. 1883-1897, Apr. 2013.
[18] Y. Yan, K. An, B. Zhang, W. -P. Zhu, G. Ding and D. Guo, “Outage-
Constrained Robust Multigroup Multicast Beamforming for Satellite-
Based Internet of Things Coexisting With Terrestrial Networks,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 10, pp. 8159-8172, May 2021.
[19] A. Bazzi and M. Chaﬁi, “On Outage-Based Beamforming Design
for Dual-Functional Radar-Communication 6G Systems,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 8, pp. 5598-5612, Aug. 2023.
[20] Y. Zou, Z. Wang, X. Chen, H. Zhou and Y. Zhou, “Knowledge-Guided
Learning for Transceiver Design in Over-the-Air Federated Learning,"
IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 270-285, Jan. 2023.
[21] S. Bi, L. Huang, H. Wang and Y. -J. A. Zhang, "Lyapunov-Guided Deep
Reinforcement Learning for Stable Online Computation Ofﬂoading in
Mobile-Edge Computing Networks," IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
vol. 20, no. 11, pp. 7519-7537, Nov. 2021.
[22] W. Xia, G. Zheng, Y. Zhu, J. Zhang, J. Wang and A. P. Petropulu,
“A Deep Learning Framework for Optimization of MISO Downlink
Beamforming,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 1866-1880,
Mar. 2020.
[23] E. Björnson, M. Bengtsson, and B. Ottersten, “Optimal multiuser trans-
mit beamforming: A difﬁcult problem with a simple solution structure,”
IEEE Signal Process Mag., vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 142-148, Jul. 2014.
[24] J. Zhang, M. You, G. Zheng, I. Krikidis and L. Zhao, “Model-Driven
Learning for Generic MIMO Downlink Beamforming With Uplink
Channel Information,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 21, no. 4,
pp. 2368-2382, Apr. 2022.
[25] J. Kim, H. Lee, S. -E. Hong and S. -H. Park, “Deep Learning Methods
for Universal MISO Beamforming," IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol.
9, no. 11, pp. 1894-1898, Nov. 2020.
[26] J. Kim, H. Lee, S. -E. Hong and S. -H. Park, “A Bipartite Graph
Neural Network Approach for Scalable Beamforming Optimization,”
IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 333-347, Jan. 2023.
[27] Q. Hu, Y. Cai, Q. Shi, K. Xu, G. Yu and Z. Ding, “Iterative Algorithm
Induced Deep-Unfolding Neural Networks: Precoding Design for Mul-
tiuser MIMO Systems," IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 2,
pp. 1394-1410, Feb. 2021.
[28] Q. Shi, M. Razaviyayn, Z. Luo, and C. He, “An iteratively weighted
MMSE approach to distributed sum-utility maximization for a MIMO
interfering broadcast channel," IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 59, no.
9, Sept. 2011.
[29] W. Jin, J. Zhang, C. -K. Wen and S. Jin, “Model-Driven Deep Learning
for Hybrid Precoding in Millimeter Wave MU-MIMO System," IEEE
Trans. Commun., vol. 71, no. 10, pp. 5862-5876, Oct. 2023.
[30] J. Guo and C. Yang, “A Model-based GNN for Learning Precoding,"
IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., doi: 10.1109/TWC.2023.3336911.
[31] M. Zhang, J. Gao and C. Zhong, “A Deep Learning-Based Framework
for Low Complexity Multiuser MIMO Precoding Design,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun., vol. 21, no. 12, pp. 11193-11206, Dec. 2022.
[32] J. Kim, H. Lee and S. -H. Park, “Learning Robust Beamforming for
MISO Downlink Systems,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 25, no. 6, pp.
1916-1920, Jun. 2021.
[33] Z. Zhang, M. Tao and Y. -F. Liu, “Learning to Beamform in Joint
Multicast and Unicast Transmission With Imperfect CSI,” IEEE Trans.
Commun., vol. 71, no. 5, pp. 2711-2723, May 2023.
[34] M. You, G. Zheng and H. Sun, “A Data Augmentation based DNN
Approach for Outage-Constrained Robust Beamforming,” IEEE Int.
Conf. Commun., pp. 1-5, 2021.
[35] W. Cui and W. Yu, “Uncertainty Injection: A Deep Learning Method
for Robust Optimization,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no.
11, pp. 7201-7213, Nov. 2023.
[36] C. B. Peel, B. M. Hochwald, and A. L. Swindlehurst, “A Vector-
perturbation
Technique
for
Near-capacity
Multiantenna
Multiuser
Communication-part I: Channel Inversion and Regularization,” IEEE
Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 195–202, Jan. 2005.
[37] C.-B. Chae, D. Mazzarese, N. Jindal, and R. W. Heath, Jr., “Coordinated
Beamforming with Limited Feedback in the MIMO Broadcast Channel,"
IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 26, no. 8, pp. 1505-1515, Oct. 2008.
[38] K. Hornik, M. Stinchcombe, and H. White, “Multilayer feedforward
networks are universal approximators,” Neural Netw., vol. 2, no. 5, pp.
359–366, Jul. 1989.
[39] Y. Shen, Y. Shi, J. Zhang, and K. B. Letaief, “Graph neural networks for
scalable radio resource management: Architecture design and theoretical
analysis,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 101–115, Jan.
2021.
[40] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka, “How Powerful are Graph
Neural Networks?” Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representation, May 2019.
[41] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang and P. S. Yu, “A
Comprehensive Survey on Graph Neural Networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4-24, Jan. 2021.
[42] Y. Shen, Y. Shi, J. Zhang, and K. B. Letaief, “Graph Neural Networks
for Scalable Radio Resource Management: Architecture Design and
Theoretical Analysis,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 1, pp.
101–115, Jan. 2021.
[43] J. Guo and C. Yang, “Learning Power Allocation for Multi-Cell-Multi-
User Systems With Heterogeneous Graph Neural Networks,” IEEE
Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 884-897, Feb. 2022.
[44] H. Lee, S. H. Lee, and T. Q. S. Quek, “Learning Autonomy in
Management of Wireless Random Networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 8039–8053, Dec. 2021.
[45] A. Chowdhury, G. Verma, C. Rao, A. Swami, and S. Segarra, “Unfolding
WMMSE Using Graph Neural Networks for Efﬁcient Power Allocation,”
IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 9, pp. 6004–6017, Sep.
2021.
[46] B. Dai, Y.-F. Liu, and W. Yu, “Optimized Base-Station Cache Allocation
for Cloud Radio Access Network With Multicast Backhaul,” IEEE J. Sel.
Areas Commun., vol. 36, no. 8, pp. 1737–1750, Aug. 2018.
[47] Y. Shi, J. Zhang, and K. B. Letaief, “Optimal Stochastic Coordinated
Beamforming for Wireless Cooperative Networks With CSI Uncer-
tainty,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 63, no. 4, pp. 960–973, Feb.
2015.
[48] C. Psomas, M. You, K. Liang, G. Zheng and I. Krikidis, “Design and
Analysis of SWIPT With Safety Constraints," Proceedings of the IEEE,
vol. 110, no. 1, pp. 107-126, Jan. 2022.
[49] I. Sutskever, J. Martens, G. Dahl, and G. Hinton, “On the importance of
initialization and momentum in deep learning,” Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
pp. 1139-1147, May 2013.
[50] D. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), pp. 1–15, 2015.
[51] A. Damnjanovic et al., “A survey on 3GPP heterogeneous networks,”
IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 10-21, Jun. 2011.
[52] Michael Grant and Stephen Boyd, “CVX: Matlab software for disci-
plined convex programming, version 2.0 beta.” http://cvxr.com/cvx, Sep.
2013.
[53] Emil Björnson and Eduard Jorswieck, “Optimal resource allocation in
coordinated multi-cell systems,” Foundations and Trends in Communi-
cations and Information Theory, vol. 9, no. 2-3, pp. 113-381, 2013.
[54] W. Yu and T. Lan, “Transmitter optimization for the multi-antenna
downlink with per-antenna power constraints,” IEEE Trans. Signal
Processing, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 2646-2660, 2007.
