1
Towards 6G MIMO: Massive Spatial Multiplexing,
Dense Arrays, and Interplay Between
Electromagnetics and Processing
Emil Björnson, Fellow, IEEE, Chan-Byoung Chae, Fellow, IEEE, Robert W. Heath Jr., Fellow, IEEE,
Thomas L. Marzetta, Life Fellow, IEEE, Amine Mezghani, Member, IEEE, Luca Sanguinetti, Senior
Member, IEEE, Fredrik Rusek, Member, IEEE, Miguel R. Castellanos, Member, IEEE,
Dongsoo Jun, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, and Özlem Tu˘gfe Demir, Member, IEEE
Abstract—The increasing demand for wireless data transfer
has been the driving force behind the widespread adoption
of Massive MIMO (multiple-input multiple-output) technology
in 5G. The next-generation MIMO technology is now being
developed to cater to the new data traffic and performance
expectations generated by new user devices and services in
the next decade. The evolution towards “ultra-massive MIMO
(UM-MIMO)” is not only about adding more antennas but
will also uncover new propagation and hardware phenomena
that can only be treated by jointly utilizing insights from the
communication, electromagnetic (EM), and circuit theory areas.
E. Björnson is with the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden. E-mail:
emilbjo@kth.se.
C.-B. Chae and D. Jun are with the School of Integrated Technology,
Yonsei
University,
Seoul
03722,
South
Korea.
E-mail:
{cbchae,
dongsoo.jun}@yonsei.ac.kr.
R. W. Heath, Jr. is with the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92161, USA.
E-mail: rwheathjr@ucsd.edu.
T. L. Marzetta is with the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, New York University, Brooklyn, NY 11201, USA. E-mail:
tom.marzetta@nyu.edu.
A. Mezghani is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University
of
Manitoba,
Winnipeg,
MB
R3T
5V6,
Canada.
E-mail:
amine.mezghani@umanitoba.ca.
L. Sanguinetti is with the Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell’Informazione,
University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy. E-mail: luca.sanguinetti@unipi.it.
F.
Rusek
is
with
Sony
Europe
B.V.,
Lund,
Sweden.
E-mail:
fredrik.x.rusek@sony.com.
M. R. Castellanos is with the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695, USA.
E-mail: mrcastel@ncsu.edu.
Ö. T. Demir is with the TOBB University of Economics and Technology,
Ankara, Türkiye. E-mail: ozlemtugfedemir@etu.edu.tr.
The work of E. Björnson is supported by Swedish Research Council and
Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research. The work of C.-B. Chae and D.
S. Jun is in part supported by the Institute of Information and Communication
Technology Promotion (IITP) grant funded by the Ministry of Science and
ICT (MSIT), Korea (2021-0-00486, 2021-0-02208). The work of R. W.
Heath, Jr. was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under
grant nos. NSF-ECCS-2153698, NSF-CCF-2225555, NSF-CNS-2147955 and
is supported in part by funds from federal agency and industry partners as
specified in the Resilient & Intelligent NextG Systems (RINGS) program, as
well as by support from Nokia, Samsung and Qualcomm. The work of T. L.
Marzetta was supported by NYU WIRELESS. The work of A. Mezghani was
in part supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council
of Canada as well as Research Manitoba. The work of L. Sanguinetti was
partially supported by the Italian Ministry of Education and Research (MUR)
in the framework of the FoReLab project (Departments of Excellence). The
work of M. R. Castellanos was supported in part by Nokia, Motorola, and
Samsung. The work of Ö. T. Demir was supported by 2232-B International
Fellowship for Early Stage Researchers Programme funded by the Scientific
and Technological Research Council of Türkiye.
This article offers a comprehensive overview of the key benefits
of the UM-MIMO technology and the associated challenges.
It explores massive multiplexing facilitated by radiative near-
field effects, characterizes the spatial degrees-of-freedom, and
practical channel estimation schemes tailored for massive arrays.
Moreover, we provide a tutorial on EM theory and circuit theory,
and how it is used to obtain physically consistent antenna and
channel models. Subsequently, the article describes different ways
to implement massive and dense antenna arrays, and how to co-
design antennas with signal processing. The main open research
challenges are identified at the end.
Index Terms—Ultra Massive MIMO, extremely large-scale
aperture array, massive spatial multiplexing, electromagnetic
theory for communication, antenna array design.
I. INTRODUCTION
T
HE need for equipping transmitters and receivers with
multiple antennas in wireless communication systems has
been recognized for over a century. The first observed benefit
was the adaptive directivity achievable by controlling the
constructive and destructive superposition of electromagnetic
(EM) signals using an antenna array [1], [2]. The transmitter
can use this feature, traditionally referred to as beamform-
ing, to focus a transmitted signal at the desired receiver
while avoiding interference at specific locations. Similarly,
the receiver can amplify signals impinging from a particular
direction using multiple antennas while suppressing undesired
interference. The second observed benefit was the higher
robustness against channel fading achieved by using multiple
antennas [3]–[6], as it becomes less likely that all transmit-
receive antenna pairs experience deep fades simultaneously
as we increase the number of antennas and the array size.
This feature is called spatial diversity and channel harden-
ing [7]. The third and most recently discovered benefit is
multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) communications [8]–
[12], where antenna arrays are used to spatially multiplex
many layers of data at the same time and frequency. This can
be done in multi-user MIMO mode, where a multiple-antenna
base station (BS) communicates with multiple user equip-
ments (UEs) simultaneously. This is enabled using adaptive
beamforming: the BS gives each transmitted signal a different
spatial directivity, has the ability to amplify signals received
from UEs in different directions, and can filter out interference
in both transmission directions. There is also the single-user
arXiv:2401.02844v1  [cs.IT]  5 Jan 2024
2
Transmitter
with size D
Reactive
near-field
Radiative near-field
0
dr
dF
Far-field
Fig. 1. The EM field looks different depending on the distance
from the transmitting aperture antenna. The wavefront is
almost planar in the far-field, while the spherical curvature
is clearly noticeable in the radiative near-field but not reactive
effects such as inductive coupling and evanescent waves.
MIMO mode, where a multi-antenna BS and multi-antenna UE
exchange multiple data layers simultaneously by beamforming
through different propagation paths.
The MIMO technology was first introduced in cellular and
WiFi networks as a premium feature but is nowadays a main-
stream technology. The 5G technology was built around the
Massive MIMO concept [13] of having a surplus of antennas at
the BS compared to the UE side, which makes it practically
feasible to protect the data layers from mutual interference
through spatial filtering, even under imperfect channel state
information (CSI) and hardware impairments [14], [15]. A
typical 5G BS in 2023 had 64 antenna ports and can support
up to 16 data layers, such as 8 UEs assigned with two layers
each. The driving force behind the MIMO adoption is the
rapidly increasing demand for data traffic in cellular networks,
currently growing by 40% per year [16]. The 5G MIMO
technology, particularly in the 3.5 GHz band, can supply
current BS sites with significantly higher capacity than in 4G,
to support higher speeds per device and accommodate more
simultaneously served devices. If the data traffic continues to
grow at the current pace over the next ten years, 6G technology
must deliver 1.410 ≈30 times higher capacity than current
networks. New emerging user devices (e.g., for augmented
reality) and services (e.g., federated learning, hyper-reliable
and low-latency communication) might create an even faster
wireless traffic growth; thus, the next-generation MIMO tech-
nology should be developed to at least support 100 times
higher capacity than in current networks. A portion of that
can be achieved by expanding the bandwidth. However, since
spectrum is scarce in bands suitable for wide-area coverage,
the focus should be on increasing the sum spectral efficiency
(SSE) [bit/s/Hz]. The SSE is the total data transmitted per
second and per Hertz among all the spatially multiplexed
layers.
The spectral efficiency (SE) per spatial layer is fundamen-
tally limited by the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), as expressed
by the Shannon formula log2(1 + SNR) bit/s/Hz [17]. The
logarithmic nature of this function places a fundamental con-
straint on massive improvements through the use of multiple
antennas, except for UEs experiencing very low SNRs. How-
ever, the spectral efficiency (SSE) of ν data layers of this kind
is upper-bounded by ν · log2(1 + SNR), a linearly increasing
Transmitter
Receiver
Wavefront
z + ∆
z
∆
D
2
D
2
Fig. 2. The curvature of an impinging spherical wave creates
a delay ∆
c between the center of the receiver and the edge.
The delay turns into a phase-shift of 2πfc ∆
c = 2π
λ ∆.
function of ν. To enhance SSE in 6G, the logical approach
is to employ “more MIMO”–increasing spatial multiplexing
with more layers to serve additional UEs. On the BS side, this
involves using larger antenna arrays, either physically larger or
relative to the wavelength (if the carrier frequency is increased
compared to 5G). At first glance, this evolution may seem
like an engineering challenge: assembling more antennas using
current technology and applying the same algorithms found in
textbooks such as [15], [18] with larger-dimensional matrices.
However, the reality is vastly different on multiple levels.
Antenna array design in 6G requires not only a drastic increase
in the number of antennas but also fundamental changes in
EM properties. Despite the numerous antennas in 5G Massive
MIMO systems, the aperture size is small enough to neglect
near-field effects, focusing primarily on the far-field. In 6G,
the significantly increased number of antennas and higher
frequency bands will expand the near-field region, especially
with dense BS deployments in urban and indoor environments.
Consequently, MIMO systems with extremely larger antenna
arrays, referred to as X-MIMO in industry terminology, are
gaining attention. Various terms, such as extremely large aper-
ture arrays (ELAA) [19], extremely large-scale MIMO (XL-
MIMO) [20]–[23], and Ultra-Massive MIMO (UM-MIMO),
have been suggested in academic literature. In this paper, we
use the latter terminology.
In addition to near-field propagation becoming more dom-
inant, we approach fundamental limits on spatial degrees-
of-freedom; more physically accurate models of channels,
antennas, and hardware effects are necessary; and new im-
plementation challenges emerge. These aspects will be further
described in the remainder of this paper.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II provides an overview of radiative near-field propaga-
tion effects and how they can be exploited for finite-depth
beamforming and massive spatial multiplexing. Section III
introduces the spatial degrees-of-freedom concept, which is
the physical limit on the multiplexing capability of an array.
We then describe efficient channel estimation techniques in
Section IV, with a focus on exploiting array geometry and
propagation characteristics. Having introduced the basic con-
cepts, the paper then provides a tutorial on the underlying
theory. Section V provides a linear system approach to EM
theory. Section VI expands on this approach by using circuit
theory to obtain a physically consistent end-to-end MIMO
3
channel representation. Section VII describes how to account
for realistic antenna properties, such as mutual coupling, polar-
ization, and near-field propagation for MIMO array modeling.
Next, Section VIII describes four antenna array architectures
that might be used in 6G UM-MIMO systems. Section IX
takes a closer look at how the hybrid array architecture can
be optimized jointly with the signal processing algorithms.
Finally, the paper is concluded in Section X by describing
some open research challenges.
II. MIMO COMMUNICATION IN THE RADIATIVE
NEAR-FIELD
The behavior of a wireless channel is governed by
Maxwell’s equations, which can be solved to determine the
electric and magnetic field distributions that a transmission
creates at different locations in a specific environment. This
fundamental approach often results in very complex expres-
sions, but they can be fortunately simplified and tailored to the
specific scenario, allowing for practical use in system design
and optimization. As contemporary MIMO systems expand in
size, the once-accurate simplified propagation models must be
enriched to account for “new” phenomena that were always
present but previously considered negligible. This section pro-
vides a tutorial on such properties, starting from the near- and
far-fields of antennas and arrays, and subsequently describing
the impact they have on future UM-MIMO communication
systems. We will go deeper into many of these aspects in
later sections.
We begin by considering the transmission from a point
source. The electric field observed at a distance z from the
source, in any direction perpendicular to the propagation
direction, is proportional to [24]
−jηe−j 2π
λ z
2λz

1 +
j
2πz/λ −
1
(2πz/λ)2

,
(1)
where η denotes the impedance of free space and λ is the sig-
nal’s wavelength. The first term in (1) has a squared magnitude
that decays proportionally to 1/z2, consistent with the classical
pathloss behavior for free-space propagation [25]. The second
factor in (1) is often overlooked in communications—for good
reasons—because
1 +
j
2πz/λ −
1
(2πz/λ)2

2
= 1 −
1
(2πz/λ)2 +
1
(2πz/λ)4 ,
(2)
which quickly approaches 1 when the propagation distance z
increases. Already at a distance of 2λ from the transmitter, (2)
equals 0.99. The region z ≥2λ where (1) can be approximated
as −jηe−j 2π
λ z
2λz
is known as the far-field, while z < 2λ represents
the near-field region. There is no strict boundary between these
regions since (2) approaches 1 in a continuous manner.
If we replace the point source with a transmitting aperture
antenna having a maximum length D that is larger than the
wavelength, then the distances that characterize the near- and
far-field change as well. In particular, the near-field can be
divided into two parts: the reactive and radiative near-field. For
most antenna types, terms similar to the second factor in (1)
must be taken into account at distances z ≤dr = 0.62
p
D3/λ
[26], [27]. These terms represent EM components that remain
around the transmitter instead of being radiated; for example,
related to inductive coupling and evanescent fields. It is
in the reactive near-field that the induction-based near-field
communication (NFC) technology operates and it is commonly
used for tags and keycards. This paper does not consider such
technologies. A transmitting aperture antenna has similar far-
field behavior as a point source when observed at a distance
z > dF =
2D2
λ , where dF is greater than dr for D larger
than λ. This boundary is known as the Fraunhofer distance
or Rayleigh distance. The far-field region is also known as
the Fraunhofer region. In between the mentioned distance
boundaries is a range dr
< z ≤dF that is called the
radiative near-field or Fresnel region. Fig. 1 illustrates these
different regions and emphasizes the core difference between
the radiative near-field and conventional far-field: the curvature
of the wavefront. It is spherical in both cases, which means
that the received signal power decays with the distance z
proportionally to 1/z2, but the curvature is only noticeable
in the radiative near-field.
The implications of the strongly curved wavefront in the
radiative near-field are easier to comprehend when considering
an aperture antenna with the length D that receives a signal
from a transmitting point source. This setup is shown in Fig. 2
for a transmitter at the distance z in the broadside direction.
When the wavefront reaches the receiver’s center, a distance
∆remains until it reaches the edge. The extra distance can be
calculated as
∆=
r
z2 + D2
4 −z = z
r
1 + D2
4z2 −z ≈D2
8z ,
(3)
where the last expression follows from the first-order Taylor
approximation √1 + x ≈1 + x
2, that is accurate for small x
(i.e., when z ≫D
2 ). The Fraunhofer distance z = dF, where
dF ≫D
2 so that we can use the above approximation, gives
rise to the phase-shift
2πfc
∆
c = 2π
λ ∆≈2π
λ
D2
8dF
= π
8 ,
(4)
where fc is the carrier frequency and c is the speed of the
EM radiation. There is nothing deeper behind the Fraunhofer
distance than the fact that cos(π/8) ≈0.92 ≈1 so that
the spherical curvature creates a tiny phase variation over the
antenna [28].
The spherical curvature also gives rise to power variations
over the receive antenna. Since the squared magnitude of the
EM field is proportional to 1/z2, the power difference is
z2
(z + ∆)2 ≈
z2

z + D2
8z
2
(5)
between the center and edge. The power variations are negli-
gible if z = dB = 2D [29] so that the propagation distance
is twice as large as the surface, in which case (5) becomes
0.94. We notice that dF = dB D
λ , which means that the phase-
variations are more prevalent when considering large antennas.
The aforementioned approximations are conventionally
made in wireless communications without further discussion,
but there are ways to be more precise. The gain of a receiving
4
aperture antenna can be computed by taking an integral of the
impinging field over the aperture. For example, if the antenna
spans the interval x ∈[−a/2, a/2], y ∈[−b/2, b/2] in the xy-
plane and the electric field is denoted as E(x, y), then the gain
(relative to an isotropic reference antenna in the far-field) can
be computed as [30], [31]
G =

R a/2
−a/2
R b/2
−b/2 E(x, y)dx dy

2
Aiso
R a/2
−a/2
R b/2
−b/2
E(x, y)
2 dx dy
,
(6)
where Aiso = λ2
4π is the effective area of an isotropic antenna.
Looking at this expression, it might seem logical that a larger
antenna has a higher gain because of the expanded integration
intervals, but this is not a necessity because phase variations
in E(x, y) over the antenna impact the numerator in (6). This
phenomenon occurs even in the far-field when the impinging
signal arrives from a non-broadside direction, creating linear
phase variation similar to that of a plane wave. However,
the effect is particularly dominant in the radiative near-field
due to the wave’s spherical curvature. For example, for a
transmitting point source in the broadside direction (0, 0, z),
with z > max(dr, dB), the electric field observed at the
receiver can be expressed as
E(x, y) =
E0
√
4πz e−j 2π
λ
√
x2+y2+z2,
(7)
where E0 is a scaling factor for the electric intensity and
p
x2 + y2 + z2 is the distance from the transmitter to the
location (x, y, 0) at the receiver. This expression assumes that
the power variations over the antenna are negligible, but there
are still phase variations across the antenna aperture when
max(dr, dB) < z ≤dF. By substituting (7) into (6), the gain
simplifies to
G =

R a/2
−a/2
R b/2
−b/2 e−j 2π
λ
√
x2+y2+z2dx dy

2
Aisoab
,
(8)
which becomes ab/Aiso if the phase in the numerator is ap-
proximately constant over the antenna aperture. This is a clas-
sical approximation that is valid for z > dF because the electric
field can then be approximately as E(x, y) ≈
E0
√
4πze−j 2π
λ z.
The ratio ab/Aiso between antenna areas is how the antenna
gain is normally computed in the far-field. By contrast, a
strictly smaller gain is obtained for z < dF =
2(a2+b2)
λ
(with D =
√
a2 + b2 being the antenna’s diagonal length)
because of the noticeable spherical phase variations that make
some parts of the impinging field cancel other parts. The way
to circumvent that effect is to use an array of many small
antennas instead of one large antenna so that each antenna
achieves its physically maximum gain and then the gains are
superimposed through receiver processing. In other words, we
want to use small transmit and receive antennas that are in
each others’ far-field, but build large antenna arrays that can
observe radiative near-field effects across the array.
Fig. 3 illustrates this situation for an array of 10 × 10
λ/2-spaced antennas in the xy-plane, and the coloring shows
the (normalized) real part cos(2π
p
x2 + y2 + z2/λ) of the
impinging electric field when the transmitter is 8λ from the
x
y
z
(0, 0, z)
Transmitter
One receive
antenna
cos

2π
λ
p
x2 + y2 + z2

Fig. 3. The (normalized) real part of the electric field in (7)
is shown for an antenna array deployed in the xy-plane. The
transmitter is located in a broadside direction in the radiative
near-field, leading to spherical phase variations.
receiver. The spherical-shaped phase variations result in values
between +1 to −1. If there were only one big antenna covering
the entire surface, the red parts would cancel the yellow parts
when computing (8), leading to a large loss in antenna gain.
The gain of this large antenna would be only 35% of the
maximum gain ab/Aiso when a = b = 10 λ
2 = 5λ, and the
percentage shrinks as the antenna size increases. However, in
Fig. 3, the surface is divided into 100 antennas so that the
phase variation is small across each individual antenna. This
division results in a negligible gain loss per antenna so that
at least 95% of the maximum gain is achieved. This comes at
the expense of requiring receiver hardware that can combine
the antenna signals, which we anyway need for beamforming
in mobile scenarios.
When the array is large, there can also be power variations
between the antennas deployed at the surface, caused by
having substantially different distances (and angles) to the
transmitter. In contrast to the phase-shifts, this geometric
pathloss effect cannot be mitigated through signal processing
or making the antenna elements smaller. Fortunately, the effect
is negligible in many practical situations. If we let D denote
the largest dimension of the array (i.e., the diagonal in Fig. 3),
then it follows that dF = dB D
λ ≫dB for large arrays with
D ≫λ. This implies that there is a wide distance range
dB < z ≤dF where the power variations over the antenna
array are negligible but not the phase variations. We will
call this the Fresnel region. As an example, consider a half-
wavelength-spaced BS array with the size 1 × 0.5 m, and
operating at 30 GHz (i.e., λ = 0.01 m). This array contains
5000 antennas in the configuration 100 × 50. It then follows
that dB = 2D = 2
√
12 + 0.52 ≈2.24 m so most UEs will
be located beyond that distance, while they might be closer
than the Fraunhofer distance that becomes dF =
2D2
λ
=
5
2(12+0.52)
0.01
= 250 m. We will focus on the Fresnel region
range dB < z ≤dF in the remainder of this section, but note
that there is one particular situation when the power variations
over the antenna array cannot be neglected: when studying the
asymptotic limits of large arrays because otherwise one obtains
implausible results where more power is received than was
transmitted [29]. One must also accommodate for such effects
when modeling non-line-of-sight propagation environments
[32], where different parts of a large array might see different
scattering objects.
A. Beamfocusing in the radiative near-field of arrays
Suppose the antenna array is used to transmit a signal to
a particular receiver. When M antennas transmit the signal
with phase-shifts that create constructive interference at the re-
ceiver’s location, the received power becomes M times larger
than when transmitting with the same power from a single
antenna. This is called the array gain or beamforming gain
and is achievable in line-of-sight scenarios at any propagation
distance z > dB = 2D (i.e., there are no pathloss variations
over the array). The gain is the same in the far-field and
radiative near-field, but there is an essential difference in how
the radiated signal behaves at other locations, such as the
shape of the focus area around the receiver. These geometric
properties will be analyzed in this section.
Consider a uniform square array with M antennas arranged
as N × N antennas, where N =
√
M is an integer and ∆
denotes the antenna spacing. We let n ∈{1, . . . , N} be the
antenna index in the x dimension and m ∈{1, . . . , N} be the
index in the y dimension. The antenna with index (n, m) is
centered at the point (¯xn, ¯ym, 0), where
¯xn =

n −N + 1
2

∆,
(9)
¯ym =

m −N + 1
2

∆.
(10)
We consider an isotropic broadside receiver at the location
(0, 0, z). If each transmit antenna has the gain G towards the
receiver, the channel coefficient becomes
hn,m = λ
√
G
4πz e−j 2π
λ
√
¯x2n+¯y2m+z2
(11)
≈λ
√
G
4πz e
−j 2π
λ

z+
¯x2
n
2z +
¯y2
m
2z

,
(12)
where (11) is the exact expression and the first-order Taylor
approximation √1 + x ≈1 + x
2 can be utilized to simplify it
to (12) since z is substantially larger than ¯xn and ¯ym when
z > dB. This is known as the Fresnel approximation [33].
If the data symbol s ∈C is transmitted with power p, the
received signal is
r =
N
X
n=1
N
X
m=1
hn,m
ejψn,m
√
M
s + wn,m,
(13)
where wn,m ∼NC(0, σ2) is independent complex Gaussian
receiver noise, ψn,m is the phase-shift assigned at antenna
(n, m), and 1/
√
M divides the total power equally among the
transmit antennas. The SNR becomes
SNR = p
σ2

N
X
n=1
N
X
m=1
hn,m
ejψn,m
√
M

2
= p
σ2
λ2G
(4πz)2
1
M

N
X
n=1
N
X
m=1
e−j 2π
λ
√
¯x2n+¯y2m+z2ejψn,m

2
|
{z
}
=AG
,
(14)
where AG denotes the array gain. It becomes N 4/M = M
when ψn,m =
2π
λ
p
¯x2n + ¯y2m + z2 so that the transmitter
cancels all the phase-shifts. This is the maximum array gain.
Suppose the transmitter instead focuses the signal on a point
at the distance z but with some other small angle φ measured
from the boresight in the horizontal plane. The focus point is
at (z sin(φ), 0, z cos(φ)) and is obtained when the transmitter
assigns the phase-shifts
ψn,m = 2π
λ
p
(¯xn −z sin(φ))2 + ¯y2m + z2 cos2(φ)
= 2π
λ
p
¯x2n + ¯y2m + z2 −2z¯xn sin(φ).
(15)
The array gain at the original receiver can then be computed,
using the Fresnel approximation, as
1
M

N
X
n=1
N
X
m=1
e−j 2π
λ
√
¯x2n+¯y2m+z2ej 2π
λ
√
¯x2n+¯y2m+z2−2z¯xn sin(φ)

2
≈1
M

N
X
n=1
N
X
m=1
e
−j 2π
λ

z+
¯x2
n
2z +
¯y2
m
2z

e
j 2π
λ

z+
¯x2
n
2z +
¯y2
m
2z −¯xn sin(φ)

2
= N 2
M

N
X
n=1
e−j 2π
λ (n−N+1
2 )∆sin(φ)

2
≈N 2
M

Z N
0
e−j 2π
λ n∆sin(φ)dn

2
= Msinc2
 1
λN∆sin(φ)

,
(16)
where we also approximated the summation over many anten-
nas by the corresponding integral. This approximation is tight
when the antenna spacing is small, similar to how a Riemann
sum approaches a Riemann integral. This array gain expression
depends on the angle φ but is independent of the propagation
distance, which implies that it is the same in the radiative near-
field as in the far-field. The squared sinc-function determines
how the array gain observed at the receiver tapers off when
the transmitter aims the signal at a different location at the
same distance. Since sinc2(0.443) ≈0.5, half the array gain
is achieved at φ = ± arcsin( 0.443λ
N∆) ≈± 0.443λ
N∆. The half-
power angular beamwidth then becomes
BW3 dB ≈0.886λ
N∆
rad,
(17)
which is inversely proportional to the width N∆of the array
and proportional to the wavelength. Although the angular
6
beamwidth is the same at all propagation distance for which
z > dB, the physical beamwidths (in meters) is approximately
BW3 dBz; thus, the width of the beam around the receiver is
proportional to the distance to the receiver and much smaller
in the radiative near-field than in the far-field.
When the antenna spacing is ∆= λ/2, the beamwidth
expression simplifies to BW3 dB = 1.772
N . It is clear that more
antennas per dimension leads to a narrower beamwidth.
The radiated signal from an array is often illustrated as
a cone with an angular width of BW3 dB. However, this
description is incomplete because the array gain also tapers
off in the depth domain. We can characterize this phenomenon
similarly to the beamwidth analysis by supposing that the
transmitting array focuses the emitted signal on another point
(0, 0, F) in the same direction but at a distance F ̸= z. Let
us define the focal point deviation
zeff =

1
F −1
z

−1
=
Fz
|F −z|.
(18)
The array gain at the original receiver can then be computed,
using the Fresnel approximation, as [31]
1
M

N
X
n=1
N
X
m=1
e−j 2π
λ
√
¯x2n+¯y2m+z2ej 2π
λ
√
¯x2n+¯y2m+F 2

2
≈1
M

N
X
n=1
N
X
m=1
e
−j 2π
λ

z+
¯x2
n
2z +
¯y2
m
2z

e
j 2π
λ

F +
¯x2
n
2F +
¯y2
m
2F

2
≈1
M

Z N/2
−N/2
ej π
λ
n2∆2
zeff dn
Z N/2
−N/2
ej π
λ
m2∆2
zeff dm

2
= M
8zeff
dF
2


C2


s
dF
8zeff

+S2


s
dF
8zeff





2
, (19)
where dF = 4N 2∆2/λ is the Fraunhofer distance of the
considered array, while C(x) =
R x
0 cos(πt2/2)dt and S(x) =
R x
0 sin(πt2/2)dt denote the Fresnel integrals.
The array gain expression in (19) has the structure A(x) =
(C2(√x) + S2(√x))2/x2, where x = dF/(8zeff). This is
a decreasing function for x ∈[0, 2] with A(0) = 1 and
A(1.25) ≈0.5. Hence, half the array gain is achieved when
1.25 =
dF
8zeff
= dF|F −z|
8Fz
→z =
dFF
dF ± 10F .
(20)
This implies that when the transmitter focuses a signal on
the point (0, 0, F), the array gain will only be large at some
of the potential locations (0, 0, z) in the same direction. The
smallest solution is z =
dFF
dF+10F < F, which is the starting
point of the beam in the depth domain. If F < dF/10, we
also have the solution z =
dFF
dF−10F , which marks the end of
the beam [31]. Hence, for transmission to receivers at locations
dF < F < dF/10 in the radiative near-field, the transmitted
signal behaves as a beam with finite half-power beamdepth:
BD3 dB =
dFF
dF −10F −
dFF
dF + 10F =
20dFF 2
d2
F −100F 2 .
(21)
(a) Beamforming in the radiative near-field
(b) Beamforming in the far-field
Finite depth
Infinite depth
dF
10
BW3 dB
BW3 dB
Fig. 4. Beamforming leads to a limited beamwidth regardless
of whether the signal is focused on a receiver in the near-field
or far-field. However, if the focus point is at a closer distance
than dF/10, the beamdepth will be finite. This is not the case
when the focus point is beyond dF/10, because then the beam
continues until infinity.
This is a unique phenomenon for the beamdepth because for
transmission to points F > dF/10 (which includes the far-
field), the beam continues all the way to infinity. Interestingly,
as F
→∞so that the beam is focused at a faraway
location, the lower limit
dFF
dF+10F converges to dF/10. This is
an alternative boundary between the near-field and far-field
when considering the beamdepth.
Fig. 4 illustrates the differences between beamforming in
the radiative near-field and far-field, which in this case ends
at dF/10. The beamdepth is finite in the near-field but semi-
infinite in the far-field, meaning that it starts at dF/10 and then
continues to infinity. These phenomena resemble the depth
of focus of camera lenses, which is finite when focusing on
a nearby object (leading to a blurry background) and semi-
infinite when the object is far away [34]–[36].
The array processing that underpins near-field beamfocusing
has been studied for decades, starting with the works [37]–[39]
on microphone arrays. It is the applications within long-range
wireless communication networks that are novel [40]–[44] and
considered for the 6G era.
B. Near-field spatial multiplexing
The fact that signals transmitted toward receivers in the
near-field have a smaller focus area (both in width and depth)
means a drastically reduced risk of causing interference be-
tween concurrent signal transmissions. This is by itself an en-
abler of the emerging massive spatial multiplexing paradigm,
where we are not serving tens of UEs per BS as in 5G
but hundreds or a thousand. The classical SE formulas and
transmit/receiver signal processing schemes (see [15], [18])
can be utilized, but they will result in substantially higher
values thanks to the more favorable propagation conditions
obtained in the radiative near-field compared to the far-field.
To exemplify these effects, we begin by considering an
uplink single-cell multi-user MIMO setup with K single-
7
antenna UEs. The channel between the M-antenna BS and
UE k is denoted by hk ∈CM. The received signal y ∈CM
is modeled as
y =
K
X
k=1
hksk + n,
(22)
where sk is the data signal transmitted by UE k with power
pk and n ∼NC
 0, σ2IM

is circularly symmetric complex
Gaussian noise with variance σ2 and IM is the M-dimensional
identity matrix. The BS can apply a receive combining vector
vk ∈CM to the received signal in (22) as vH
ky to detect the
signal sk. By treating the co-user interference as noise, the SE
for UE k becomes
log2






1 +
pk
vH
khk
2
K
P
i=1,i̸=k
pi
vH
khi
2 + σ2 ∥vk∥2






(23)
≤log2


1 + pkh
H
k


K
X
i=1,i̸=k
pihih
H
i + σ2IM


−1
hk


,
(24)
where the upper bound is achieved by using the linear mini-
mum mean-squared error (LMMSE) receive combining vector:
vLMMSE
k
= pk


K
X
i=1
pihih
H
i + σ2IM


−1
hk.
(25)
This combining scheme finds the SE-maximizing tradeoff
between amplifying the signal power by aligning the receiver
to hk and rejecting interference by spatial whitening of the
received signal using the inverse of E{yyH}. The provided
formulas are typical ones for uplink multi-user MIMO because
the difference lies in the channels.
Fig. 5 shows the uplink SE achieved in a single-cell multi-
user MIMO setup operating at 30 GHz. The BS has a half-
wavelength-spaced array of 1 × 0.5 m, containing 5000 an-
tennas in the configuration 100 × 50. The single-antenna UEs
are uniformly distributed in the horizontal plane in the angular
sector φ ∈

−π/3, +π/3

and in the distance range 15–500 m.
The Fraunhofer distance is dF = 250 m in this setup, so some
of the UEs are located in the radiative near-field and others
in the far-field. The propagation parameters are otherwise the
same as in [45].
The figure contains one curve obtained using an exact line-
of-sight channel model and one curve obtained using the
conventional far-field approximation, which is mismatched for
the UEs actually located in the radiative near-field. Fig. 5(a)
shows the average SE per UE, as a function of the number of
UEs. A logarithmic scale is used on the horizontal axis since
we consider the range 10–1000 UEs. The SE per UE reduces
as more UEs are added to the setup, due to the increased
interference. The optimal LMMSE receive combining from
(25) is utilized. There is a substantial gap between the curves
where the exact model consistently provides better results.
The far-field approximation basically moves near-field UEs
101
102
103
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
(a) The average SE per UE.
101
102
103
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
(b) The average sum SE for all UEs.
Fig. 5. The average uplink SE per UE and sum SE in a setup
with 5000 antennas. The exact near-field propagation model
leads to much higher values than in an identical setup where
a mismatched far-field approximation is utilized.
outwards to the far-field and thereby makes the resulting beam-
focus areas wider and deeper, leading to increased interference.
This showcases how the ability to utilize the depth domain to
distinguish between UE channels makes it easier to deal with
interference.
Fig. 5(b) shows the SSE, which is the SE values from
Fig. 5(a) multiplied by the respective number of UEs. The
massive difference between using the exact and mismatched
far-field model becomes evident in this case: With the exact
model, the SSE keeps growing with the number of UEs while
it saturates at around 200 UEs with the mismatched model.
From a network operational perspective, we want to transmit
as much data as possible, and the new propagation phenomena
observed in the radiative near-field enable higher SEs per UE
and efficient spatial multiplexing of many more UEs than if
the same MIMO system would operate in the far-field. It is
through the massive spatial multiplexing of 1000 UEs that one
can reach groundbreaking SSE levels in 6G.
While the depth perception facilitated the spatial multiplex-
ing of many UEs, the tiny beamwidth can enable multiple data
streams to be transmitted to a single UE—even in line-of-sight
scenarios where we are used to only support a single spatial
layer in the far-field. For the sake of argument, suppose the BS
8
and UE are both equipped with uniform linear arrays (ULAs)
with M antennas. The UE has half-wavelength spacing since
it is supposed to be a compact device, while the spacing ∆
at the BS can be optimized if its ULA is deployed on the
facade of a building. When the BS transmits, the half-power
beamwidth is given in (17) and is inversely proportional to ∆.
If we make it sufficiently small, we can beamform a different
signal to each antenna in the receiver array.
We denote the distance between the transmitter and receiver
as d, and let the ULAs be deployed perpendicularly to the
propagation direction. The BS then sees two adjacent UE
antennas with an angular difference of sin(φ) ≈(λ/2)/d.
We can select ∆so that the array gain is zero at the adjacent
antenna. The expression in (16) is zero when φ is such that
the argument of the sinc-function is 1. By solving for ∆, we
obtain
1
λN∆sin(φ) = 1
⇒
∆=
λ
N sin(φ) ≈2d
N .
(26)
Hence, the total length of the ULA should be N∆= 2d, which
makes it longer than the propagation distance. More practical
deployment scenarios can be achieved by tuning the antenna
spacing in the ULAs at both the transmitter and receiver. If
the spacings are ∆t and ∆r, respectively, the same result can
be achieved if [46]–[48]
∆t∆r = λd
M .
(27)
The main message is that one can benefit from increasing
the antenna spacing in single-user MIMO systems if that
pushes the propagation into the radiative near-field, where the
beamwidth can be smaller than the array.
Fig. 6 shows how the SE over a single-user MIMO channel
with 16 antennas at the transmitter and receiver. The propa-
gation distance is d = 50 m, the frequency is 30 GHz, and
the SNR for a single layer is 20 dB. The UE has a ULA
with half-wavelength spacing while the antenna spacing at the
BS is varied on the horizontal axis. The first point on the
curve represents half-wavelength spacing and the figure shows
that drastically higher SEs can be achieved by increasing
the spacing. The reason is that the MIMO channel matrix
transitions from having one non-zero singular value in the
beginning to 16 equally large singular values at the peak value
at around 8 m. At that point, the BS can transmit a different
beam toward each receive antenna, and it will only be “heard”
by the designated antennas thanks to the narrow beamwidth.
Beyond that antenna spacing, the SE begins to decay again
due to sidelobe effects.
The main point of this example is that large SEs can also
be achieved for a single UE in the radiative near-field, since
we can make the beamwidth so narrow that we can beamform
different signals toward different parts of the receiver.
III. SPATIAL DEGREES-OF-FREEDOM
A key reason for increasing the number of antennas in
future UM-MIMO systems is to enable more spatial layers,
as demonstrated in the last section. We will now take a closer
look at the maximum number of spatial layers that can be
Fig. 6. The SE of single-user MIMO channel with 16 antennas
at each side depends on the antenna spacing. The UE has half-
wavelength spacing while the BS has a varying spacing, which
can be fine-tuned to maximize the SE.
transmitted efficiently over a given channel, which is called
the spatial degrees-of-freedom (DoF). As a background to this
concept, we begin by reviewing the concept of spectral DoF.
A. Spectral degrees-of-freedom
Wireless channels are also known as waveform channels
because they take a transmitted analog waveform/signal as the
input and produce a received analog waveform at the output.
Waveforms can be represented either as time-domain signals or
as spectra in the frequency domain, and the Fourier transform
serves as the bridge between these identical representations.
Let us consider a waveform channel that accepts complex-
valued continuous-time signals s(t) that is approximately
limited to the T-length time interval [−T/2, T/2] and strictly
band-limited to the spectral interval [−B/2, B/2]. A band-
limited signal cannot be entirely time-limited, but according
to the Shannon-Nyquist sampling theorem [17], we can ap-
proximate s(t) as
s(t) ≈
T B/2−1
X
n=−T B/2
s
 n
B

sinc (Bt −n) ,
(28)
where the approximation error becomes negligible as TB →
∞. Notably, (28) is a band-limited orthonormal series expan-
sion characterized by the finite set of coefficients
(
s
 n
B

: n = −TB
2 , . . . , TB
2
−1
)
.
(29)
The cardinality of this set is
η = TB
(30)
and is called the dimension or DoF of the waveform. Since
the signal s(t) is completely determined by B complex-
valued equal-spaced samples per second, we can call these
the spectral DoF.
In communication systems, we want to design the waveform
s(t) to carry data over the channel. A practical system might
operate over a real-valued passband channel with bandwidth
9
B around some carrier frequency fc; that is, it accepts real-
valued waveforms that are band-limited to the spectral interval
[fc −B/2, fc + B/2]. This channel can be identically repre-
sented as a complex baseband waveform channel of the kind
described above [49].1 Hence, the data signal is completely
determined by B complex-valued equal-spaced samples per
second; these are the spectral DoF available for shaping the
communication signal at the transmitter. For example, the
transmitter can place information into these samples using a
16-QAM (Quadrature Amplitude Modulation) scheme, which
is a complex constellation with 16 different states. Since each
sample represents log2(16) = 4 bits, the transmitter can
convey four bits per spectral DoF. If the channel has the
bandwidth B = 10 MHz, which leads to 10 · 106 DoF per
second, the data rate becomes 4 · 10 · 106 = 40 Mbps. More
information can be conveyed by increasing the constellation
size, but it is essential that the data rate is below the channel
capacity, so the receiver can decode the data without error. The
SE is the theoretical limit on the number of bits to convey per
sample. We previously said that its unit is bit/s/Hz, but it can
be equivalently expressed as bit/sample or bit/DoF.
In 5G, the typical bandwidth in the 3.5 GHz band is
100 MHz, and the maximum constellation size is 1024-QAM.
This corresponds to 100 · 106 DoF/s and 10 bit/DoF. Conse-
quently, the maximum data rate is 1 Gbps and it is determined
by two variables: the spectral DoF (i.e., bandwidth) and SE. It
is not realistic to increase the SE beyond 10 bit/DoF in future
networks, because one needs an SNR greater than 30 dB to
reach that number. When moving beyond that SNR value, the
system is typically limited by hardware fidelity rather than
noise. We also cannot expect to increase the bandwidth by
more than a factor of 10 compared to 5G. Hence, the important
question is: How can we increase the data rate by a factor of
100× or 1000×? The answer is that we need to create new
signal dimensions through MIMO instead.
B. (Massive) MIMO: An information-theoretic perspective
Two types of MIMO communication systems were intro-
duced earlier in this paper: single-user MIMO involves a
multi-antenna BS and a multi-antenna UE, while multi-user
MIMO involves a multi-antenna BS and multiple UEs. In
both cases, the expansion of the signal space into the spatial
(antenna) domain creates multiple parallel spatial channels
representing the spatial DoF. The simultaneous transmission
of independent data signals over these spatial channels, as
opposed to different time slots and/or frequency subbands,
results in a traffic multiplier or spatial multiplexing gain, as
long as effective measures are taken to mitigate interference
between the transmitted signals. Fig. 7 illustrates this as a
two-dimensional DoF plane, where the spatial and spectral
dimensions are orthogonal. The basic building blocks of a
signal is 1 DoF spanning over one Hertz and one antenna
dimension. Although we might always have fewer spatial DoF
(e.g., hundreds to thousands) than spectral DoF (e.g., millions
to billions) in wireless systems, the total number of DoF is
1Due to Doppler spread and use of other pulses than the sinc-function, the
bandwidth can be slightly larger than B.
...
16-QAM
Spectral DoF
One DoF:
Spatial DoF
1 antenna
1 Hz
1
Fig. 7. The basic building blocks of wireless waveforms
are called DoF, which is the number of complex-valued
coefficients that describes the signal per second. There are
both spectral and spatial DoF and their product is the total
number of DoF. Each DoF can represent an amount of data
that equals the SE of the channel, for example, represented
using a 16-QAM constellation.
their product. We will now take a closer look at the spatial
DoF delivered by the two MIMO categories.
The capacity of single-user MIMO was first established
in [10], [11]. Such a channel with Mt transmit antennas and
Mr receive antennas is represented by the MIMO channel
matrix H ∈CMr×Mt, which can be modeled in various ways
depending on propagation environment. The channel capacity
is generally determined by the Mmin = min(Mr, Mt) singular
values µ1, . . . , µMmin of H, such that [49, Sec. 7.1]
C =
Mmin
X
i=1
log2
 
1 + piµ2
i
σ2
!
,
(31)
where the summation is over the different spatial layers and
the corresponding transmit powers are p1, . . . , pMmin. For an
ideal MIMO channel where all the singular values are equal
and each entry of H has an equal squared magnitude β, the
capacity becomes
C = Mmin log2
 
1 + SNRMrMt
M 2
min
!
,
(32)
where SNR = pβ/σ2, p is the total transmit power, and σ2
is the noise variance. This is the kind of MIMO channel that
was obtained by optimizing the antenna spacing according to
(27). The number of signals that are spatially multiplexed, or
equivalently, the number of spatial DoFs, increases with the
minimum of Mr and Mt. Hence, the total DoF of a single-
user MIMO system with bandwidth B is min(Mr, Mt) × B
per second. With Mt = Mr = 64, there is a potential for
a 64-fold increase in capacity compared to a single-antenna
system.
The capacity of multi-user MIMO systems was character-
ized in the early 2000s [50]–[52]. The capacity requires non-
linear signal processing at the transmitter or receiver, which
is challenging to implement in practical systems. Hence, there
10
is a variety of alternative SE expressions for specific linear
processing schemes, such as the ones provided in (23). We
will consider an uplink expression from [18, Table 3.2] for
the case of i.i.d. Rayleigh fading channels, K single-antenna
UEs and M BS antennas. If all UEs have the same average
SNR, the SSE becomes
K log2

1 +
M SNR
K SNR + 1

.
(33)
The multiplicative factor K preceding the logarithm indicates
the availability of K spatial DoFs. What is more intriguing is
that by increasing both M and K simultaneously (with some
fixed ratio M/K that is preferably large), we can maintain a
nearly constant SE per UE while providing a K-fold increase
in SSE. If we could somehow allow the UEs to collaborate
in a multi-user MIMO system, we obtain a single-user MIMO
setup whose capacity must be equal or higher. This indicates
that the spatial DoFs cannot surpass min(M, K) in a multi-
user MIMO system.
The basic principles of MIMO outlined above were estab-
lished for specific idealistic channel models and perfect CSI.
However, the spatial multiplexing capability of single-user
MIMO is traditionally hampered by having a low-rank channel
matrix, while imperfect CSI acquisition is a main limiting
factor for multi-user MIMO. The Massive MIMO concept was
introduced in [13] to address these challenges. Firstly, it relies
on deploying a significantly larger number of BS antennas than
spatially multiplexed devices (e.g., M/K ≥8). In addition
to the reason described above, there are two further practical
advantages: it reduces interference between UEs and provides
the so-called channel hardening, which ensures minimal SNR
fluctuations after the precoding/combining has been applied.
Secondly, the protocols were designed for time-division du-
plexing (TDD) to enable CSI acquisition for arbitrarily many
BS antennas through uplink pilot transmission [15], [18]. We
will return to the channel estimation challenge in Section IV.
Current 5G BSs are built using the Massive MIMO principle
with digital planar arrays of M = 32 or M = 64 antennas.
When increasing these numbers in future networks to hundreds
or thousands, it would be desirable to pack the antennas more
closely. However, this will make the channel coefficients more
similar (e.g., statistically correlated) and we cannot increase
the capacity indefinitely by doing so. This is analogous to the
waveform channel where, given the bandwidth constraint B
and the transmission interval T, increasing the number of time
samples will also not increase the spectral DoF indefinitely.
This is called temporal oversampling. The available spectral
DoF in the given time interval is always limited to TB. A
fundamental question arises: given an area limitation for the
antenna array, what is the intrinsic number of DoF available
in the channel? To answer this question, it is necessary to
extend the Shannon-Nyquist sampling theorem to spatially
bandlimited fields.
C. Shannon-Nyquist sampling theorem for electric fields
While a single receive antenna takes samples of an imping-
ing waveform at different times, an antenna array can take
Fig. 8. Wavenumber support of the electric field s(x, y, z).
many spatially separated samples of the waveform at the same
time. We can apply the classical Shannon-Nyquist sampling
theorem also in this situation, with the only difference being
that the samples are collected over a limited spatial interval
rather than a limited time interval. When transforming a
spatial signal into the frequency domain, we obtain the spatial
frequencies, also known as wavenumbers. Before we can apply
the sampling theorem to this situation, we need an accurate
description of electric fields in the wavenumber domain, which
is tied to its physical nature and geometry of the antenna
array, as it imposes different boundary conditions on the set
of Maxwell’s equations. In both the EM and communications
literature, various methodologies for the treatment of deter-
ministic and stochastic spatial fields have been explored. A
non-exhaustive list of relevant publications in this area is [53]–
[63].
To understand the basic principles, we consider a scenario
where EM waves propagate through a homogeneous, isotropic,
source-free, and scattered infinite medium. Monochromatic
waves with no polarization then behave as acoustic waves
and the electric field {s(x, y, z) : (x, y, z) ∈R3} satisfies
the scalar Helmholtz equation in the frequency domain [64,
Eq. (1.2.17)]

∇2 + κ2
s(x, y, z) = 0,
(34)
where κ = 2π
λ is the angular wavenumber of the considered
signal (i.e., the angular variation in radians per unit of length).
The solution to (34) takes the form
s(x, y, z) = αej(kxx+kyy+kzz)
(35)
where α ∈C is an unknown complex scaling factor and
(kx, ky, kz) ∈R3 are three wavenumber coefficients that
characterize the solution. These represent the wavenumbers
observed in the x, y, and z dimensions, respectively. Plugging
(35) into (34) yields the condition
k2
x + k2
y + k2
z = κ2.
(36)
This implies that the wavenumber κ of the original wave is
divided between the three dimensions. We can observe the
value ranges kx, ky, kz ∈[−κ, κ], but if we increase the mag-
nitude of one wavenumber, the others must reduce accordingly.
In fact, the constraint in (36) allows us to eliminate one of
11
the three coefficients. Specifically, we consider the half-space
where kz is positive such that
kz =
q
κ2 −k2x −k2y.
(37)
It follows that (kx, ky) must have compact support given by
D(κ) =
n
(kx, ky) ∈R2 : k2
x + k2
y ≤κ2o
,
(38)
which is a disk of radius κ centered on the origin, as illustrated
in Fig. 8. From (35) and (37), we thus have that
s(x, y, z) = αe
j

kxx+kyy+√
κ2−k2x−k2yz

,
(39)
which is the equation of an incident plane-wave impinging
on the spatial point (x, y, z). Note that, by imposing the
condition (kx, ky, kz) ∈R3, we exclude the evanescent waves
from the analysis and consider only propagating waves. This
is consistent with our previous assumption of studying the
radiative near-field and far-field. If no directionality is enforced
on the EM waves (corresponding to an isotropic scattering
environment), then the support of s(x, y, z) is limited to
D(κ)
 = πκ2, revealing the spatially band-limited nature
of EM fields. Scattering mechanisms act as a filter limiting
further the field to a smaller support [62]. Compared to the
classical definition of a band-limited signal in the frequency
domain, here the notion of band-limited support applies in the
wavenumber domain.
The above findings are crucial for calculating the spatial
DoF of electric fields through the generalization of the sam-
pling theorem. Assume for example that s(x, y, z) is observed
over a one-dimensional (1D) line segment of length Lx along
the x-axis. Then, the spatial DoF that characterize all possible
fields that can be observed are given by [59]–[62]
η1D = 2
λLx = κ
π Lx.
(40)
The first expression is the product between the length Lx of
the spatial interval where the field is observed, while
2
λ is
the length of the interval [−1/λ, 1/λ] of spatial frequencies
(i.e., non-angular wavenumbers) that the field might contain.
This is the spatial-wavenumber counterpart to the product
TB between time duration T and bandwidth B in (30). The
second expression in (40) expresses the same relation using
the angular wavenumber κ.
Suppose that the electric field s(x, y, z) is instead observed
over a two-dimensional (2D) rectangle with side lengths Lx
and Ly. In this case, the spatial DoF are given by [59]–[62]
η2D = π
λ2 LxLy,
(41)
which are proportional to the surface area LxLy normalized
by the squared wavelength. Hence, each portion of the array
aperture with area λ2 can observe π DoF from the impinging
electric field.
One may expect that the spatial DoFs of a two-dimensional
array would be the product of the DoFs that can observed
horizontally and vertically, using the one-dimensional formula
in (40). That computation leads to
˜η =
 2
λLx
  2
λLy

= 4
λ2 LxLy,
(42)
which is different from (41). Specifically η2D/˜η = π/4 ≈
0.79, so the correct spatial DoFs is smaller. The difference is
exactly the ratio between the areas of the disk D(κ) and the
square circumscribing it, regardless of the dimensions of the
rectangular aperture. The intuition is that the wavenumbers
observed horizontally and vertically in a planar array are
correlated. For example, a wave that arrives from a large
elevation angle (i.e., near the y-axis) can give rise to rather
small horizontal variations, similar to how there are smaller
distances when moving around the Earth near the North Pole
compared to the equator.
D. Implications for MIMO Systems
The signal transmission in wireless communications gener-
ates electric fields at the transmitter and samples them at the
receiver. The spatial DoF determine how many coefficients
are required to characterize these electric fields, not in general
but from the perspective of a particular antenna array; if two
different electric fields look the same to the array, then we
cannot use their difference to carry any additional data. If we
are given a particular deployment area of Lx × Ly meters to
deploy an array, how should we deploy the antennas to obtain
all the available spatial DoF?
The common practice in array design has been to use
uniform planar arrays (UPAs) with the spacing ∆= λ/2 both
horizontally and vertically. We can fit
M = Lx
∆
Ly
∆= 4
λ2 LxLy
(43)
antennas into this area. This value matches with (42) and is,
thus, larger than the available spatial DoF that are given by
(41). Consequently, the conventional approach to array design
is sufficient to capture all the available spatial DoF.
Fig. 9 illustrates what would happen if we reduce the
antenna spacing to ∆< λ/2. We consider an isotropic
scattering environment where plane waves can arrive at the
M receive antennas from any direction with equal probability.
In this situation, one can compute the spatial correlation matrix
R = E{hhH} of the channel vector h ∈CM and study its
eigenvalues. The number of large eigenvalues represents the
number of spatial DoF that the array observes, and this is
the maximum value since an isotropic environment excites all
possible channel dimensions. Fig. 9(a) considers a uniform
linear array (ULA) with M = 64 antennas and varying antenna
spacings. In the case of ∆= λ/2, the array covers a spatial
interval of Mλ/2 meters, and the spatial DoF in (40) then
becomes M, which results in all eigenvalues being equally
large. However, if we decrease the antenna spacing to λ/4 or
λ/6, the number of spatial DoF respectively reduces to M/2
and M/3. These numbers are illustrated with circles in the
figure and clearly predict the number of large eigenvalues; that
is, the number of channel dimensions. Fig. 9(b) considers the
case of a UPA with 64×64 antennas. We see the same general
trends as in the case of a ULA, with the main difference
that even the case with λ/2 spacing leads to only 79% large
eigenvalues.
The main conclusion from this section is that we should
continue using arrays with λ/2-spacing in future UM-MIMO
12
(a) Uniform linear array with 64 antennas.
(b) Uniform planar array with 64 × 64 antennas.
Fig. 9. The normalized eigenvalues of the spatial correlation
matrix R in decreasing order. We consider an isotropic scatter-
ing environment with different array geometries and antenna
spacings. The numbers of large eigenvalues are determined
by the spatial DoF captured by the particular array type. The
theoretical values from (40) and (41) are shown using circles.
systems. We have seen earlier in the paper (e.g., in Fig. 6) that
one can possibly benefit from increasing the antenna spacing
beyond that limit, to observe near-field propagation effects
that improve the channel conditions. However, one should not
reduce the antenna spacing in the hope of increasing the spatial
DoF because that is not possible—it corresponds to spatial
oversampling. If the array dimensions are limited, there are
still some good reasons for filling it with more antennas than
what is needed to capture all the available spatial DoF. Small
antennas have a more isotropic-like radiation pattern, which
improves the array’s ability to transmit and receive signals in
any direction. But if we shrink the antenna sizes, we should
compensate by adding more antennas into the aperture to keep
the total antenna area fixed.
IV. CHANNEL ESTIMATION FOR LARGE MIMO ARRAYS
CSI is necessary to make efficient use of a large number of
antennas, so that the transmitted signals can be beamformed to
the intended location in the downlink, and the received signal
can be combined coherently in the uplink. The basic way
of acquiring CSI is to transmit a predefined pilot sequence
and estimate the channel coefficients at the receiver side.
The length of the pilot sequence must equal the number of
transmit antennas, while arbitrarily many receive antennas can
collect channel estimates simultaneously. New communication
systems are nowadays built using TDD spectrum, where the
same band is used in both uplink and downlink. Hence, we
have the liberty to choose in which direction to transmit
pilots. Since the 5G Massive MIMO technology builds on
serving tens of UEs with a large number of BS antennas,
the pilot sequences (called sounding reference symbols in 5G)
are transmitted in the uplink where the pilot sequence length
equals the number of UE antennas [13].
The same procedure can be used in the next generation
of MIMO technology, but if we increase the number of
antennas per UE and the number of spatially multiplexed
UEs, the pilot sequence length will increase accordingly. In
this section, we will outline how the pilot sequence can be
reduced depending on what prior information exists regarding
the channel properties.
For brevity in presentation, we focus on the channel estima-
tion from an M-antenna UE to one of the many antennas at
the BS. The approach described in this section can be applied
separately for each BS antenna. The considered channel vector
is denoted by h ∈CM. The channel is made of a superposition
of multipath components. In the far-field, it can be described
as a discrete summation of plane waves arriving from different
directions. In the radiative near-field, the channel can be
expressed as a continuous summation of plane waves [55],
which is also an accurate representation of spherical waves.
Hence, we may write the channel vector as
h =
ZZ π/2
−π/2
g(φ, θ)s(φ, θ)dθdφ
(44)
where s(φ, θ) is the far-field array response vector for the
azimuth angle φ and elevation angle θ, while the angular
spreading function g(φ, θ) specifies the gain and phase-shift
from each direction. The integration limits for the azimuth
angle are limited to φ ∈[−π
2 , π
2 ] because waves can only
arrive from the front of the array.
The channel realization is determined by the angular spread-
ing function. Since small-scale UE mobility is hard to model
accurately and the interaction with the surrounding multipath
environment is complex, it is customary to model small-scale
variations stochastically. In this section, we consider the block
fading model, where the channel vector h is constant within
one block of time-frequency resources and takes independent
realization across blocks from a stationary stochastic distri-
bution. We will model g(φ, θ) as a spatially uncorrelated
circularly symmetric Gaussian stochastic process with cross-
correlation
E{g(φ, θ)g∗(φ′, θ′)} = βf(φ, θ)δ(φ −φ′)δ(θ −θ′),
(45)
where β denotes the average channel gain and f(φ, θ) is
the normalized spatial scattering function [55]. This is a
probability density function (PDF) that provides a statistical
representation of the multipath environment in terms of how
likely it is for signals to arrive from different directions. As
with any PDF, it holds that
RR
f(φ, θ)dθdφ = 1. Based on
13
these assumptions, we obtain the classical correlated Rayleigh
fading channel distribution
h ∼NC(0, R),
(46)
but the key reason for the aforementioned assumptions is that
we can give the spatial correlation matrix a geometric model:
R = E{hh
H} = β
ZZ π/2
−π/2
f(φ, θ)s(φ, θ)s
H(φ, θ)dθdφ (47)
which follows from the property in (45). The average gain of
the channel is E{∥h∥2} = tr(R) = Mβ.
We will consider different ways of estimating the real-
izations of h depending on which parts of the statistical
characterization are known. In all these cases, the estimation
is based on transmitting a predefined pilot sequence of some
length τp ≤M. It is desirable to make this sequence as short
as possible to not spend unnecessarily many signal resources
(i.e., DoF) on channel estimation, and we will later show
that different estimators allow for different pilot lengths. We
let Φ ∈Cτp×M denote the pilot sequence matrix, where
the (n, m)th entry represents the pilot symbol transmitted
from antenna m of the UE at time instance n in the τp-
length sequence. We assume that the average pilot power is
normalized to one, in the sense that
tr
 Φ
HΦ

= τp.
(48)
If we collect all the τp received symbols at the BS antenna in
a vector y ∈Cτp, we can express it as
y = √pΦh + n,
(49)
where p > 0 is the pilot power and n ∼NC
 0, σ2Iτp

is the
independent noise.
A. Least-squares estimation
The simplest channel estimation method is least-squares
(LS) estimation which does not require any statistical infor-
mation regarding the channel vector. This estimator finds the
solution to the least squares problem
minimize
bh∈CM
y −√pΦbh

2
(50)
between the actual received signal y and the potential received
signal √pΦbh in the absence of noise. If the pilot length is
τp = M so that the pilot matrix Φ can be selected to be
invertible, the solution to (50) is obtained as
bhLS = Φ−1y
√p
= h + Φ−1n
√p
| {z }
=ehLS
,
(51)
where ehLS ∈CM is the channel estimation error. This choice
makes the term inside the square in (50) zero. The channel
estimation quality can be quantified by the average power of
the channel estimation error, which is called the mean-squared
error (MSE). The MSE of the LS estimator is computed as
MSELS = E
h −bhLS

2
= E
ehLS

2
= σ2
p tr

(Φ
HΦ)−1
(52)
by utilizing the fact that E {nnH} = σ2IM. This expression
reveals that the channel estimation quality depends on the
selection of the pilot matrix. It can be shown that selecting Φ
as any unitary matrix minimizes the MSE, under the average
power constraint in (48). The resulting minimum MSE is
MSE⋆
LS = Mσ2
p
(53)
which is proportional to the number of UE antennas (i.e., the
number of unknowns) and a linearly decreasing function of
the pilot SNR,
p
σ2 . The key observation is that the optimal
pilot matrix is obtained by treating each dimension of the
M-dimensional vector space equally by allocating the same
amount of power to all of them.
The main drawback of the LS estimator is that the pilot
length must equal the number of UE antennas, otherwise, we
cannot invert the pilot matrix. To reduce the pilot length and
obtain better-quality channel estimates, we need to exploit
more about the structure of the channel, as elaborated in the
following part.
B. Minimum mean-squared error estimation
The considered channel h follows the correlated Rayleigh
fading model in (46) with the spatial correlation matrix R
defined in (47). If this correlation matrix is completely known
at the BS, the minimum MSE (MMSE) estimate can be
computed as [65]
bhMMSE = √pRΦ
H 
pΦRΦ
H + σ2IM
−1
y.
(54)
As the name suggests, the MMSE estimator minimizes the
MSE among all conceivable estimators that have access to the
statistical characterization. The true channel h can be decom-
posed as h = bhMMSE + ehMMSE, where the estimation error
ehMMSE is independent of the estimate bhMMSE. Consequently,
the MSE can be computed as
MSEMMSE = tr

E
n
ehMMSEeh
H
MMSE
o
= tr

E

hh
H	
−tr

E
n
bhMMSEbh
H
MMSE
o
= Mβ −tr

pRΦ
H 
pΦRΦ
H + σ2IM
−1
ΦR

. (55)
This MSE depends on the pilot matrix Φ and, thus, it can
be minimized by properly designing the pilot matrix. We let
R = UΛUH denote the eigendecomposition of the spatial
correlation matrix R, where the unitary matrix U ∈CM×M
contains the eigenvectors as its columns, and the corresponding
eigenvalues are located in decreasing order along the diagonal
of the matrix Λ = diag(λ1, . . . , λM). It can be shown that
14
the MSE is minimized by selecting the τp ×M pilot matrix as
Φ = DUH [66], where D ∈Cτp×M is a rectangular diagonal
matrix where the diagonal entries are
dm =
s
max

0, µ −σ2
pλm

,
m = 1, . . . , τp,
(56)
where µ > 0 is selected such that
τp
X
m=1
max
 
0, µ −σ2
pλm
!
= τp.
(57)
This pilot matrix is matched to the eigendecomposition of the
spatial correlation matrix since U is utilized, while d2
m deter-
mines how much power is allocated to estimating the channel
components along the mth eigenvector. The power allocation
in (56) has a water-filling structure, where more power is
allocated to the channel directions with larger eigenvalues.
If we substitute Φ = DUH into (54), we can simplify the
estimator as
bhMMSE = UAy
(58)
where A = √pΛDT  pDΛDT + σ2Iτp
−1 is a diagonal
matrix. This MMSE estimator carries out two operations. First,
it computes the MMSE estimates of the channel components
in the τp strongest eigendirections as Ay. Second, it brings
this estimate back to the original channel space by multiplying
it with the eigenvector matrix U.
The core difference between the MMSE and LS estimator is
that the former knows the statistical strength of the channel in
different in each eigendirection. It can therefore fine-tune the
estimator and allocate more pilot power to stronger eigendi-
rections, thereby reducing the MSE. While the LS estimator
necessitates τp = M, the MMSE estimator can be applied with
any τp and will then only transmit pilots along the τp strongest
eigendirections. To highlight the practical importance of this,
we will consider a scenario where the rank of R is strictly
smaller than M, as previously illustrated in Fig. 9.
In Fig. 10, we plot the normalized mean square error
(NMSE), obtained by dividing the MSE by E{hhH} = tr(R)
for the LS and MMSE estimators in different propagation
environments. We consider an 8 × 8 UPA with the an-
tenna spacing ∆= λ/4. Two different propagation environ-
ments are considered: isotropic and clustered scattering. The
isotropic environment assumes that the multipath components
are equally strong in all directions (as in Fig. 9). The clustered
environment is generated using a model from [67] where
there are three scattering clusters located in the azimuth
directions 0, π/4, and −π/4 and each having a 10◦angular
standard deviation. The effective signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)
is ptr(R)/(Mσ2) = 10 dB.
The figure shows the NMSE as a function of the pilot
length τp. When τp < M, the LS estimator is applied with
the pseudoinverse of the pilot matrix instead of the true
inverse. This leads to poor estimation performance, which
is why we ruled out this situation previously. The MMSE
estimator outperforms the LS estimator since it exploits the
spatial correlation matrix, but it particularly enables good
estimation quality at significantly smaller pilot lengths. The
Fig. 10. The NMSE versus the pilot length τp for the LS
and MMSE estimators in isotropic and clustered scattering
environments. The dots show the NMSE performance when
τp is equal to the rank of the corresponding spatial correlation
matrix.
dots on the plot represent the MMSE estimator’s performance
when τp equals the rank of the spatial correlation matrices. In
the case of isotropic scattering, the value matches the spatial
DoF. For clustered scattering, the rank is smaller since the
scattering environment only excites a subset of the possible
channel dimensions. If we increase the pilot length beyond
the dot-marked number, the pilot matrix will not explore any
new channel dimensions but only benefit from increased pilot
energy. The MMSE estimator provides lower MSEs when the
propagation environment has a structure, such as clustered
scattering because it can then focus the pilot power into a
few important eigendirections.
C. Reduced-subspace least-square estimation
In the preceding section, we demonstrated how the MMSE
estimator effectively utilizes the spatial correlation matrix to
minimize the MSE. This M × M matrix can be estimated in
practice by collecting many channel realizations and forming
a sample covariance matrix [15], but much more than M
observations are needed to obtain an accurate estimate. Hence,
it is challenging to acquire the per-UE spatial correlation
matrix information in practice, particularly in scenarios with
a larger antenna number, rapid UE mobility that changes the
statistics, or during short data packet transmissions [67].
In such situations, an alternative approach is to only exploit
the spatial correlations induced by the array geometry and
general characteristics of the propagation environment. For
instance, it may be known that multipath components can
only be observed within certain angular intervals. This implies
that any plausible channel vector lies in a lower-dimensional
subspace of CM. If we know the basis vectors of this subspace,
the channel estimation can be performed exclusively within
this subspace. This approach is called reduced-subspace least
squares (RS-LS) estimation [67].
15
We collect the orthonormal basis vectors of the subspace
as columns of the matrix U ∈CM×r, where r ≤τp < M is
the dimension of the subspace. Hence, any UE channel can be
expressed as h = Uv for some v ∈Cr. The RS-LS estimator
builds on estimating v and consists of two steps. First, we
compute the LS estimate of v in the subspace spanned by the
columns of U as
bvLS =
1
√p

U
HΦ
HΦU
−1
U
HΦ
Hy,
(59)
where we assumed τp ≥r so that the inverse is well-
defined. The matrix

U
HΦHΦU
−1
U
HΦH in (59) gives
the orthogonal projection of the channel onto the considered
subspace. Next, we return this estimate to the original M-
dimensional space by multiplying bvLS by U:
bhRS−LS = UbvLS =
1
√pU

U
HΦ
HΦU
−1
U
HΦ
Hy
= Uv
|{z}
=h
+ 1
√pU

U
HΦ
HΦU
−1
U
HΦ
Hn.
(60)
The RS-LS estimator effectively eliminates noise from all
unused channel dimensions when r < M, and the required
pilot length is reduced to τp ≥r (compared to τp ≥M
for the original LS estimator). The remaining question is
how to determine the basis vectors for the reduced subspace.
One option is to collect many different spatial correlation
matrices over time and then compute the union of their span
[67, Lem. 3]. Alternatively, one can consider the worst-case
scenario of isotropic scattering, where all conceivable channel
dimensions might exist in the channel vector. Fig. 9 previously
showed that such channels have a low-rank behavior when
using UPAs or when the antenna spacing is less than λ/2
This property is not UE-channel-specific but rather array-
dependent, thereby enabling the removal of noise from unused
directions.
The MSE of the RS-LS estimator in (60) is
MSERS−LS = σ2
p tr

U

U
HΦ
HΦU
−1
U
H
= σ2
p tr

U
HΦ
HΦU
−1
(61)
and depends on the pilot matrix Φ. The MSE is minimized
by selecting the pilot matrix as
Φ⋆=
rτp
r SU
H
(62)
where S ∈Cτp×r is an arbitrary matrix with orthonormal
columns [68]. Substituting the optimal pilot matrix into the
MSE expression in (61), we obtain
MSE⋆
RS−LS = r2σ2
τpp ,
(63)
which is (M/r)2 times smaller than the MSE achieved by the
LS estimator in (53) when τp = M.
Fig. 11 shows the NMSE as a function of the antenna
spacing ∆for the 8 × 8 UPA considered previously for the
same channel with clustered scattering. The LS estimator
Fig. 11. The NMSE versus the antenna spacing ∆for the
LS, RS-LS, and MMSE estimators in a clustered scattering
environment.
serves as a reference with τp = M and is unaffected by the
antenna spacing, as evident from the MSE expression in (53).
By contrast, the other estimators exhibit smaller NMSE values
as the antenna spacing decreases, because of the higher spatial
correlation that these estimators exploit to varying degrees.
The isotropic spatial correlation matrix is utilized to con-
struct the reduced subspace in the RS-LS estimator. Two RS-
LS results are presented: one with τp = M, and the other with
a pilot length equal to the dimension of the reduced subspace.
Since subspace size r decreases when ∆becomes smaller, the
pilot length used by the RS-LS estimator and MMSE estimator
with τp = r also decreases. Despite this, the NMSE decreases
as ∆reduces thanks to the increased spatial correlation. We
note that the NMSE with the RS-LS is better with τp = M
than with τp = r, but the latter might still be preferable in
practice since fewer pilot resources are required.
In summary, the RS-LS estimator is a meaningful alternative
to the conventional LS estimator, as both methods do not
require UE-specific statistical information.
D. Compressed-sensing-based channel estimation
There is a middle ground between the MMSE estimator,
which requires the complete UE-specific channel statistics, and
the RS-LS estimator which only utilizes channel statistics at
the UE population level. If the BS knows that the UE channel
features multipath propagation caused by only a small number
of scattering clusters, this information can be utilized by the
estimator. The goal is then to jointly sense the locations of the
clusters and estimate their related parameters. In such cases,
channel estimation based on compressed sensing methods can
be effective in achieving a good estimation quality with a
relatively small pilot overhead [69].
The first step in compressed-sensing-based channel estima-
tion is to create a dictionary of vectors representing the channel
from scattering clusters at different plausible locations. The
goal is then to identify a linear combination of a small number
of these dictionary vectors that results in a channel vector that
16
resembles the one observed during the pilot transmission. An
example of this is shown in Fig. 12, where we consider a chan-
nel comprising L = 3 paths from clusters located in the far-
field and a UPA at the UE. The UE antennas are deployed as
8×8 UPA with λ/4 antenna spacing. Each path is represented
by an array response vector, scaled by a complex channel
gain. Hence, the dictionary contains many such array response
vectors with uniform sampling of the plausible azimuth and
elevation angles. The azimuth angular grid Ψ = sin(φ) cos(θ)
and the elevation angular grid Ω= sin(θ) are sampled with a
period of 1/40, ensuring that all dictionary angle pairs satisfy
the condition Ψ2 + Ω2 ≤1. This leads to a dictionary size of
5019.
In this simulation, the paths are assumed equally strong on
the average, and the pilot SNR is 10 dB. Multiple random
channel realizations are considered for each pilot length,
with azimuth and elevation angles chosen from the range
[−0.9·π
2
, 0.9·π
2
]. The classical orthogonal matching pursuit
(OMP) algorithm [69] is utilized for the compressed-sensing-
based estimation. Fig. 12 shows the resulting estimation
performance, compared with the LS and RS-LS estimators,
for which all inverses are replaced by pseudo-inverses when
matrix inversion issues arise. The results show that when
τp ≥10, the OMP-based estimator significantly outperforms
the conventional LS estimator and provides the lowest NMSE.
τp = r = 44 is the point where the RS-LS estimator
has sufficient pilots to explore all the dimensions of the
reduced subspace, after which there is a slight performance
gap between the RS-LS and OMP algorithms. The OMP
algorithm experiences a performance floor for τp > 50, which
stems from the limited dictionary size and on-grid channel
estimation. More advanced compressed sensing-based algo-
rithms may provide better performance, but they come with a
significantly higher computational complexity (e.g., caused by
increasing the dictionary size). Hence, compressed-sensing-
based estimation methods are attractive to reduce the pilot
length when estimating channels that are known to feature
sparse scattering, but where the exact channel statistics are
unknown. However, for less sparse channels or when we can
afford longer pilots, the more computationally-friendly RS-LS
estimator might be a better choice.
The goal of the dictionary design is that the channel path to
any scattering cluster should be well represented by one of the
dictionary vectors, in terms of having a large inner product (in
the magnitude sense). The simulation example considered far-
field channels because we considered the channel between a
single antenna of the BS and a relatively small array of the UE.
In this scenario, the assumption of having a dictionary of far-
field array response vectors chosen with uniform sampling of
the azimuth and elevation angular domains makes good sense,
because all scattering clusters will be in the far-field of the
UE. However, when considering the complete MIMO channel
between the BS and UE, it becomes imperative to also account
for radiative near-field effects. All the considered estimation
algorithms are also applicable in this situation. When it comes
to compressed sensing-based channel estimation, we must re-
vise the dictionary design to also account for scattering clusters
located in the radiative near-field of transmitter or receiver
Fig. 12. The NMSE versus the pilot length (τp) for the LS,
RS-LS, and OMP-based channel estimators in a propagation
environment with sparse scattering.
[70], [71]. Recent proposals advocate for using a polar-domain
grid where the dictionary vectors represent channels to points
in the different angles and depths [23], [71], [72]. This design
is more challenging compared to the far-field case due to the
new depth dimension, and the fact that the shape of a beam
depends on both depth and angle. One basically needs to find a
reasonably small collection of finite-depth and far-field beams
that jointly cover all possible locations in the coverage area, in
the sense of guaranteeing a large array gain anywhere. Once
this dictionary has been designed, similar compressed sensing-
based estimation algorithms can be applied as in the far-field
[23].
V. A LINEAR SYSTEM APPROACH TO ELECTROMAGNETIC
THEORY
Highly simplified models for the function of antennas and
the propagation of EM waves have taken us a long way
in designing wireless communication systems, culminating
in Massive MIMO—the most spectrally efficient scheme yet
devised. However, to further push the limits of the MIMO
technology, we must not only consider radiative near-field
effects (as earlier in this paper) but also thoroughly model the
interactions among the antennas in an array. It seems necessary
to create a close union of EM theory and communication
theory. Important characteristics such as polarization must be
taken into account, whose analysis is required to rigorously
assess the spatial DoF [73]. We have to abandon the common
assumptions of i.i.d. Rayleigh fading, independence of interfer-
ence among receivers, and the neglect of mutual coupling [74].
None of these classic assumptions hold when considering large
and densely spaced arrays. Revising the basic system models
is a daunting prospect for most communication theorists and
signal processors. The very mention of EM theory evokes
non-physical scalar and vector potentials, black-box finite-
element simulations, complicated partial differential equations
in cylindrical or spherical coordinates, and unfamiliar Bessel
and Hankel functions.
17
In fact, tractable physics-based communication-theoretic
models are obtainable quite simply from three fundamental
principles [75]: 1) Any system of antennas, operating in a
fixed propagation medium, is completely characterized by an
impedance matrix, which quantifies the interactions among
all antennas in the system. 2) Maxwell’s equations describe
a linear space/time-invariant system. 3) The external EM field
due to any space/time distribution of electrical currents can
be exactly represented as a superposition of outgoing plane
waves, both ordinary and evanescent.
In this section, we will provide a linear system approach to
EM theory that is distinct from the conventional physicist’s
approach, which is based on vector and scalar potentials
and the method of separation of variables. The linear system
approach is ideally suited for the needs of the communications
and signal processing communities when developing future
wireless technologies.
A. Impedance matrix description of antennas
A resistor, capacitor, inductor, or an antenna is a ported
device, having a pair of wires carrying equal and opposite
currents, across which is a voltage. A system of M antennas
is an M-port network [76], [77]. If operating in a linear, time-
invariant medium, the relation between the M voltages and the
M currents constitutes a linear time-invariant (LTI) system
having a real-valued causal M × M matrix impulse response.
The Fourier transform of the matrix impulse response is equal
to the impedance matrix, which leads to the relation
V(ω) = Z(ω)I(ω),
(64)
where V(ω) ∈CM denotes the vector of voltages, I(ω) ∈CM
denotes the vector of currents, and ω is the angular frequency.
The diagonal elements of the impedance matrix Z(ω) ∈
CM×M are the self-impedances, while the off-diagonal ele-
ments are the mutual impedances. A valid impedance matrix
must satisfy four properties:
• Conjugate-symmetry in frequency, Z(−ω) = Z∗(ω);
• Causality: the real and imaginary parts of the (n, m)th
entry Znm(ω) satisfy the Kramers-Kronig relations;
• Reciprocity:
non-conjugate
transpose
symmetry,
ZT(ω) = Z(ω);
• Conservation of energy: Re
 Z(ω)

is nonnegative-
definite.
A system comprising a set of transmit antennas and a set of
receive antennas has a partitioned impedance matrix, such that
 VT(ω)
VR(ω)

=
 ZT(ω)
ZTR(ω)
ZRT(ω)
ZR(ω)
  IT(ω)
IR(ω)

,
(65)
where ZTR(ω) = ZT
RT(ω) due to the reciprocity property. The
instantaneous transmitted sum-power is
pT(t) = i
T
T(t)vT(t).
(66)
For a time-harmonic source, iT(t) = Re
 IT(ω)e−jωt 2 and
the time-average transmitted power is
¯PT =1
2I
H
T(ω)Re
 ZT(ω)

IT(ω)
+ 1
2Re
 I
H
T(ω)ZTR(ω)IR(ω)

.
(67)
If the receive currents are equal to zero (implying that open-
circuit voltages are measured) or if the receive antennas are
sufficiently decoupled from the transmit antennas (the typical
cellular scenario) then the receive currents do not contribute
to the transmitted power. In the communication literature,
the power is typically computed by summing the squared
magnitudes of the currents, but this is an inaccurate procedure
whenever there is significant mutual coupling, i.e., the off-
diagonal entries of ZT(ω) are non-negligible.
We again stress that the impedance matrix is an exact
description of any system of antennas operating in an LTI
propagation medium. In the context of wireless communica-
tion theory, the sole purpose of EM theory is to populate the
entries of the impedance matrix.
B. Space/Time Fourier solutions to Maxwell’s equations
We will now derive general expressions for the EM fields
that can appear in communication systems, and thereby be
used for carrying data. The electric and magnetic fields are
obtained as solutions to Maxwell’s equations. In a homoge-
neous and isotropic medium, Maxwell’s equations become
∇× E(t, p) = −µ0
∂H(t, p)
∂t
∇× H(t, p) = ϵ0
∂E(t, p)
∂t
+ J(t, p)
ϵ0∇· E(t, p) = ρ(t, p)
µ0∇· H(t, p) = 0,
(68)
where p = [x, y, z]T contains the Cartesian coordinates. The
EM medium is characterized by the dielectric permittivity
ϵ0 ( A·s
V·m) and the magnetic permeability µ0 ( V·s
A·m). The field
quantities are defined as follows: the electric field intensity, E
(V/m), the magnetic field intensity, H (A/m), and the electric
charge density, ρ (A · s/m3). Maxwell’s equations are driven,
in general, by a space/time distributed electric current density,
J (A/m2).
1) Linear space/time-invariant system: Maxwell’s equa-
tions describe a system whose inputs are the three components
of the vector-valued electric current density, and whose outputs
are the six components of the vector-valued electric and
magnetic fields.3 If the electric current density is displaced
in time and space, the corresponding electric and magnetic
fields are displaced in the same way. We are dealing with a
linear space/time-invariant system for which there is a 6 × 3
2A slight abuse of notation: elsewhere we represent the Fourier transform
by IT(ω).
3The divergence of the second Maxwell equation, combined with the third,
yields the charge density in terms of the current density, ∂ρ
∂t = −∇· J.
18
space/time impulse response (called the Green’s function),
G(t, p), such that
 E(t, p)
H(t, p)

= G(t, p) ∗J(t, p),
(69)
where
∗
denotes
space/time
convolution.
Applying
the
space/time
Fourier
transform,
R R R R
(·) ej(ωt−kTp)dt dx dy dz to (69) yields4

E(ω, k)
H(ω, k)

= G(ω, k)J(ω, k),
(70)
where the convolution becomes a multiplication, and k =

kx, ky, kz
T is the wavenumber. As previously,
κ = ω√ϵ0µ0 = ω
c = 2π
λ .
(71)
We can take the space/time Fourier transform of both sides
of the four Maxwell’s equations (68) and then algebraically
obtain a remarkably simple analytical solution for the electric
and magnetic fields due to the source distribution:
 E(ω, k)
H(ω, k)

=
1
kTk −κ2
" 
κ2I3−kkT
−jωϵ0

(jk×)
#
J(ω, k), (72)
where
k× =


0
−kz
ky
kz
0
−kx
−ky
kx
0

.
(73)
2) Plane-wave solution: All the action of the wave equation
is embodied in the denominator polynomial of (72) which
constitutes two simple poles in any of the three wavenumbers:
k
Tk −κ2 = (kz −γ) (kz + γ) ,
(74)
where
γ(ω, kx, ky) =
q
κ2 −k2x −k2y.
(75)
The Sommerfeld rule for choosing the sign of the square
root is that the imaginary part of the square root should
be non-negative, and when the imaginary part is zero, the
real part should be non-negative. Expressed as functions of

ω, kx, ky, z
	
, the electric and magnetic fields satisfy an
ordinary second-order differential equation in z. Suppose that
the electric current distribution is confined to the slab |z| ≤z0
(e.g., J(ω, p) = 0, ∀|z| > z0). Then for |z| > z0, the field
has to satisfy the 1D homogeneous Helmholtz equation,
"
∂2
∂z2 +

κ2 −k2
x −k2
y
#  E(ω, kx, ky, z)
H(ω, kx, ky, z)

= 0,
(76)
with z-dependence given by
 E(ω, kx, ky, z)
H(ω, kx, ky, z)

∝ejγ(ω,kx,ky)|z|, |z| > z0,
(77)
which implies that the field constitutes outgoing plane-waves
on either side of the source distribution.
To obtain the electric and magnetic fields as functions of
(ω, p) in the source-free region (i.e., outside the antenna), we
4We use mixed notation: the same symbol is used for the space/time
function and its transform.
Im(kz)
Im(kz)
Re(kz)
Re(kz)
γ(ω, kx, ky)
−γ(ω, kx, ky)
Fig. 13. Integration contours for plane-wave expansion of the
outgoing field. a) z < −z0; b) z > z0.
take the inverse wavenumber transform of (72). We perform
the kz integral by evaluating the residues of the two poles,
closing the contour in the upper-half plane for z > z0, and in
the lower-half plane for z < z0, illustrated in Fig. 13:
 E(ω, p)
H(ω, p)

=
Z ∞
−∞
Z ∞
−∞
dkx dky
(2π)2
j
2γ(ω, kx, ky)
·
" 
κ2I3−kkT
−jωϵ0

(jk×)
#
J(ω, k)ejkTp

kz=sgn(z)·γ(ω,kx,ky)
,
|z| > z0.
(78)
This formula embodies the most important principle of wave
propagation: For any compact space-time distribution of elec-
tric current, the resulting external EM field comprises a
superposition of outgoing plane-waves [78]. The plane-waves
are of two types: ordinary (propagating) for k2
x + k2
y < κ2
where kz is positive-real and evanescent (inhomogeneous) for
k2
x + k2
y > κ2 where kz is positive-imaginary and the wave
decays exponentially fast in |z|. The evanescent waves carry
only reactive power in the z-direction. The difference between
these types was previously illustrated in Fig. 8, where we
concluded that only the ordinary type provides spatial DoF
that can be used to carry data to the radiative near-field and
far-field of the source.
Every
 kx, ky

represents a plane-wave ej(kxx+kyy±γz)
propagating in the ±z directions. For each of these plane-
waves, the wavenumber vector, k, and the electric and mag-
netic fields are mutually orthogonal.5
The
external
outgoing
field
depends
only
on
J(ω, kx, ky, ±γ(ω, kx, ky)), implying that more than one
current source distribution can generate the same external
field. It is the variability in the external field that can be used
to carry data, and thereby determine the spatial DoF.
3) The plane-wave representation of the spherical wave:
Consider the Helmholtz equation (i.e., the temporal Fourier
transform of the wave equation), driven by a spatial impulse,

∇2 + κ2
F(ω, p) = −4πδ(x)δ(y)δ(z).
(79)
It is not yet obvious, but the solution is the spherical wave,
F(ω, p) = ejκ|p|
|p| . As before, we take spatial Fourier transforms
of both sides of (79), algebraically solve for F(ω, k), and then
5Here we mean “complex-orthogonal”, i.e., aTb = 0, not aHb = 0.
19
take inverse wavenumber transforms to obtain the plane-wave
representation called the Weyl integral [79]:
F(ω, p) =
Z ∞
−∞
Z ∞
−∞
dkx dky
(2π)2
j2π
γ(ω, kx, ky)
· ej(kxx+kyy+γ(ω,kx,ky)|z|).
(80)
To show that (80) is indeed representing a spherical wave,
we switch to cylindrical coordinates, and use the fact that
(79) is spherically symmetric, implying that F(ω, p) is also
spherically symmetric:
F(ω, p) = F(ω, 0, 0, |p|)
=
Z ∞
0
Z 2π
0
krdkr dϕ
2π
j
p
κ2 −k2r
· ej√
κ2−k2r|p|
= −ej√
κ2−k2r|p|
|p|

∞
0
= ejκ|p|
|p| ,
(81)
where the choice of integration contour is an exercise in the
application of the Cauchy integral theorem: the contour cannot
cross the branch cut associated with the square-root singularity.
Hence, we have established that the spherical wave ejκ|p|
|p|
can
be expanded as the integral in (80) over all plane-waves, both
propagating and evanescent.
It is well-known that many wavelengths away, a spherical
wave looks like a plane-wave locally. When the observer is
sufficiently small to observe a plane-wave, we say that it is in
the far-field. It is much less obvious that the spherical wave
can exactly be represented by a superposition of plane-waves.
The local behavior of the spherical wave in the far-field can be
inferred by application of the method of stationary phase: for
|p| ≫λ, the phase of the integrand of (80) oscillates violently,
and the only significant contribution to the integral occurs in
the vicinity of k = κp/|p|.
We note that (72) is a product, in the frequency/wavenumber
domain, of three terms, equivalent to convolutions in the
space/time domain. The first two terms comprise the Green’s
function
G(ω, k) =
1
kTk −κ2 ·
" 
κ2I3−kkT
−jωϵ0

(jk×)
#
.
(82)
Given the Fourier transform relation,
1
kTk−κ2 ↔
ejκ|p|
4π|p|, we
directly obtain the Green’s function in the space/frequency
domain as
G(ω, p) =
 GE(ω, p)
GH(ω, p)

,
(83)
where
GE(ω, p) =
1
−jωϵ0

κ2I3 + ∇∇
T ejκ|p|
4π|p|
=
1
−jωϵ0


∂2
∂x2 + κ2
∂2
∂x∂y
∂2
∂x∂z
∂2
∂y∂x
∂2
∂y2 + κ2
∂2
∂y∂z
∂2
∂z∂x
∂2
∂z∂y
∂2
∂z2 + κ2


ejκ|p|
4π|p|,
and
GH(ω, p) = [∇×] ejκ|p|
4π|p| =


0
−∂
∂z
∂
∂y
∂
∂z
0
−∂
∂x
−∂
∂y
∂
∂x
0

ejκ|p|
4π|p|.
For a particular electric current distribution, J(ω, p), we can
perform a spatial convolution with the Green’s function to
obtain the electric and magnitude fields as superpositions of
spherical waves and their first and second spatial derivatives.
We have now described two solution techniques for
Maxwell’s equations. The first one in (78) represents the
electric and magnetic fields as a superposition of plane-waves.
The second one in (69) and (83) represents the fields as a
superposition of spherical waves. The spherical-wave represen-
tation is useful for computing antenna self-impedances. In gen-
eral, the plane-wave representation is vastly superior. Firstly,
the outgoing fields can be efficiently computed via 2D dis-
crete Fourier transform (DFTs). Secondly, plane-waves, unlike
spherical waves, are origin-free so we must only characterize
their respective strength. Thirdly, there is a particularly simple
description of the generation of plane-waves by Cartesian-grid
antenna arrays. Finally, propagation in a horizontally-stratified
medium can be solved by expanding the source distribution in
plane-waves, propagating the constituent plane-waves through
the parallel layers of the medium, and finally integrating over
horizontal wavenumber to obtain the EM field within each
layer.
C. Mutual- and self-impedance
The creation of an electric current distribution entails the
exertion of power (both real and reactive) to drive the current
against an electric field which itself arises from the com-
bination of the same current distribution and other current
distributions. The computation of this power yields either
the self-impedance of an antenna or the mutual impedance
between two antennas. The instantaneous power associated
with the interaction of a current density and an electric field
is
p(t) = −
Z
J
T(t, p)E(t, p)dp.
(84)
An antenna, located at the position p1, has the associated
electric current density
J1(t, p) = Re

I1(ω)s(p −p1)e−jωt
,
(85)
where s(p) is a real-valued function of space that describes
the shape of the antenna’s current distribution. The convolution
of the current distribution with the Green’s function is equal
to an electric field, E1(t, p). A second antenna, located at
the position p2, creates a current distribution, J2(t, p), with
an expenditure of instantaneous power due to the mutual
coupling, p21(t) = −
R
JT
2(t, p)E1(t, p)dp. This integral
yields the mutual impedance between the two antennas:
Z(ω, p1 −p2)
= −
Z Z
s
T(p)GE(ω, p −´p + p1 −p2)s(´p)dp d´p. (86)
20
Im(kz)
Re(kz)
γ(ω, kx, ky)
−γ(ω, kx, ky)
Fig. 14. The only contribution to the real part of the self-
impedance are the half-residues associated with the poles for
k2
x + k2
y < κ2.
For example, an incremental vertical electric dipole of length
L0 is characterized by s(p) = L0ezδ(x)δ(y)δ(z), and the
mutual impedance is
Z(ω, p1 −p2) = −L2
0e
T
zGE(ω, p1 −p2)ez
= L2
0
jωϵ0
"
∂2
∂z2 + κ2
#
ejκ|p|
4π|p|.
(87)
For p1 = p2, (87) yields the self-impedance; the imaginary
part is infinite, but the real part (that figures in the computation
of transmitted power) is finite.
An
incremental
current
loop
(magnetic
dipole)
with
area A0, oriented in the z-direction, is characterized by
s(p) = A0δ(x)δ(y)δ(z)
h
∂
∂y −
∂
∂x 0
iT
, for which the mutual
impedance is
Z(ω, p1 −p2) = A2
0
jωϵ0
"
∂2
∂x2 + ∂2
∂y2
#
ejκ|p|
4π|p|.
(88)
The expression for the mutual impedance in (86) can be
written in the wavenumber domain as
Z(ω, p) =
Z
dk
(2π)3 S
H(k)GE(ω, k)S(k)ejkHp.
(89)
For |p| greater than the diameter of the antenna, we can extract
the two residues to obtain the plane-wave representation,
which can be computed via 2D DFT, as
Z(ω, p) =
Z Z dkx dky
(2π)2
1
2γ S
H(k)GE(ω, k)
· S(k) ej(kxx+kyy+kz|z|)
kz=γ(ω,kx,ky) .
(90)
For p = 0, (89) appears to give a purely imaginary-valued
self-impedance, because GE (82) is imaginary-valued for real-
valued k. In fact, this does not happen, because the kz contour
has to be indented; the sole contributions to the real part
of self-impedance are the half-residues associated with the
propagating plane-waves as shown in Fig. 14, which becomes
Re
 Z(ω, 0)

=
Z Z
k2x+k2y<κ2
dkx dky
(2π)2
· SH(k)
 κ2I3 −kkT
S(k)
2ωϵ0γ

kz=γ(ω,kx,ky)
.
(91)
D. Applications of EM theory to communications
By utilizing the exact EM models, we can gain insights
into the design of UM-MIMO communication systems. We
will revisit the DoF concept and its connection to polarization,
take a closer look at the evanescent waves, and finally discuss
how to model thermal noise.
1) Polarization and degrees-of-freedom: The plane-wave
expansion in (78) implies that, for every (ω, kx, ky), there
are two plane-waves having wavenumber vector k
=

kx ky ± γ
T. Recall that the wavenumber vector and the
electric and magnetic field vectors are mutually orthogonal.
Consequently, for each of the ±z-waves, the electric and
magnetic field vectors are confined to a two-dimensional
subspace. One way to characterize the subspace is a set of
three mutually orthogonal unit vectors, which form a unitary
matrix
Ψ(k) =
h
k
κ
ψv
ψh
i
=


+ kx
κ
+ kxkz
krκ
−ky
kr
+ ky
κ
+ kykz
krκ
+ kx
kr
+ kz
κ
−kr
κ
0

,
(92)
where kr =
q
k2x + k2y and kz = ±
p
κ2 −k2r. The first col-
umn vector is the normalized wavenumber vector, the second
lies in a vertical plane, and the third lies in the horizontal,
(x, y), plane. We can re-write the plane-wave representation
in (78) in terms of horizontally and vertically polarized plane-
waves by projecting both the current distribution and the E
and H fields onto the orthogonal unit vectors (note that E
and Z0H have the same physical units, where Z0 =
q
µ0
ϵ0
represents the characteristic impedance, thereby simplifying
the expression):

E(ω, p)
Z0H(ω, p)

=
Z ∞
−∞
Z ∞
−∞
dkx dky
(2π)2
−µ0
2γ ej(kxx+kyy+γ|z|)
·

















 
A+
h

ψh
−ψv

+ A+
v
 ψv
ψh
!
kz=+γ
, z > +z0
 
A−
h

ψh
−ψv

+ A−
v
 ψv
ψh
!
kz=−γ
, z < −z0
,
(93)
where the polarization amplitudes, A+
h , A+
v , A−
h , A−
v , are re-
lated to the current density by
"
A±
h (ω, kx, ky)
A±
v (ω, kx, ky)
#
=
  ψ T
h(k)
ψ T
v(k)

J(ω, k)
!
kz=±γ
.
(94)
The polarization coordinate system is illustrated in Fig. 15.
When spatial DoF were discussed in Section III, we only
considered a single polarization. We will now revisit this
concept by considering the extent to which an array of
antennas can control the spectrum of polarimetric plane-waves.
21
z
y
x
(kx, ky, +γ)
(kx, ky, −γ)
ψh(kx, ky, +γ)
ψv(kx, ky, +γ)
ψh(kx, ky, −γ)
ψv(kx, ky, −γ)
Fig. 15. For every pair of horizontal wavenumbers (kx, ky)
there are four linearly independent plane-waves: in either the
plus- or minus-z directions an h-wave whose E-field lies in
the horizontal plane, ψh, and a v-wave whose E-field lies in
a vertical plane, ψv.
Consider a N × N UPA in the (x, y)-plane with antenna
spacing ∆. The resulting current density is
J(ω, p) =
N−1
X
nx=0
N−1
X
ny=0
Inx,ny(ω)
· s
 
x −∆

nx −N −1
2

, y −∆

ny −N −1
2

, z
!
.
(95)
The currents that drive the antennas are made equal to an
inverse 2D DFT:
Inx,ny(ω) = 1
N
N−1
X
mx=0
N−1
X
my=0
ˆImx,my(ω)e−
jπ(N−1)(mx+my)
N
· e
j2π(mxnx+myny)
N
.
(96)
We substitute (96) into (95), and then take the wavenumber
Fourier transforms to obtain
J(ω, k) = S(k)
N
N−1
X
mx=0
N−1
X
my=0
ˆImx,my(ω)
·
sin

(N−1)∆
2
·

kx −2πmx
N∆

sin

∆
2 ·

kx −2πmx
N∆

·
sin

(N−1)∆
2
·

ky −2πmy
N∆

sin

∆
2 ·

ky −2πmy
N∆

.
(97)
We note that these Dirichlet kernel functions are periodic in the
wavenumber, with a period equal to 2π
∆. Furthermore, the N 2
Dirichlet-products are mutually orthogonal as well. To avoid
aliasing the propagating plane-waves, the spacing must be no
more than half of a wavelength, so ∆≤λ
2 .
Associated with each DFT current coefficient, ˆImx,my(ω)
is
a
bundle
of
plane-waves,
centered
at
 kx, ky

=

2πmx
N∆, 2πmy
N∆

, occupying a square region
2π
N∆on a side.6
For sufficiently large |p| (i.e., in the far-field), the dominant
contribution to the field is a single DFT coefficient such that

x
|p|, y
|p|

=

2πmx
κN∆, 2πmy
κN∆

.
Recall that the propagating plane-waves correspond to
k2
x + k2
y ≤κ2, or m2
x + m2
y ≤

N∆
λ
2
, while the others
are evanescent. The number of propagating plane-waves is
approximately π
 N∆/λ
2, which was stated in (41) as the
spatial DoF of a UPA.
The preceding calculation has profound implications for
planar and volumetric arrays. Firstly, the activity of halving
the spacing between the antennas while simultaneously qua-
drupling the number of antennas does not enable the UPA to
create any additional propagating plane-waves. A UPA with
λ/2-spacing is sufficient to control all spatial DoF, in the
sense of giving full control of all possible propagating plane-
waves, subject to the wavenumber resolution of the array. This
is consistent with the discussion in Section III-D.
Secondly,
although
the
considered
UPA
can
create
π

N∆
λ
2
propagating plane-waves, there is only one DoF
per plane wave so we cannot distinguish between the four
waves sharing the same horizontal wavenumbers kx, ky (i.e.,
±z, and the two polarizations). A different kind of array
design is required to obtain four DoF per plane-wave, thereby
quadrupling the total spatial DoF. Two possible designs are:
• Four parallel planar arrays, separated in z by at least λ/2,
with two arrays employing, for example, vertical electric
dipoles, and two arrays employing vertical magnetic
dipoles.
• A single polarimetric planar array that simultaneously
employs, for example, x- and y-electric dipoles, and x-
and y-magnetic dipoles. Not all combinations of the six
types of antennas are admissible. For example, a vertical
magnetic dipole combined with two horizontal electric
dipoles is linearly redundant in view of the identity
H ∝∇× E [80].
Except as noted above, the expansion of a planar array into a
volume array does not yield additional DoF.
Antenna polarization features have been exploited in wire-
less communication systems for many years [81], [82], and
even predate spatial multiplexing [83].
2) Are evanescent waves of any use?: Conventionally, DoFs
are counted as the number of linearly independent propagating
plane-waves that can be created. This excludes evanescent
waves, based on the fact that they decay exponentially fast
in the z-direction, and carry only reactive power in the
z-direction. There are two scenarios, however, which may
contradict this popular notion.
The first scenario is an extreme near-field operation (i.e.,
in the reactive near-field region), where the evanescent wave
could be a significant component of the EM field. Just as an
6When the range is comparable to the size of the array, the Dirichlet kernels
behave, in the distributional sense, as Dirac delta functions, and every DFT
current coefficient is associated with a single discrete plane-wave.
22
increased array aperture extends the Fraunhofer distance so
that many practical communication situations can take place
in the radiative-near-field, it also expands the reactive near-
field so it can be used for some short-range systems.
The second scenario builds on super-directivity. A super-
directive array (for example a planar xy-array) has sub-
wavelength spacing [84], [85], deliberately to create strong
mutual coupling. The evanescent waves decay exponentially in
the z-direction, but not in the x−y-directions [86]. Moreover,
the evanescent waves can carry real power in the x −y
directions. A linear array of M antennas (say, along the x-
axis), operating in end-fire mode, has a limiting gain of M 2
as ∆→0, compared with the gain of M for ∆= λ/2.
The super-directive array is an old concept but has never been
realized on a large scale because the antennas have to be
driven by numerically large currents which create unacceptable
I2R losses (unless super-conductive antennas are used), and
an enormous local reactive field.
3) Dense scattering propagation: The plane-wave expan-
sion turns out to be the ideal theoretical tool for han-
dling scattering propagation [80], [87]. Consider a transmit
array and a receive array embedded in a scattering envi-
ronment. As before, we can expand the transmitted field
into outgoing plane-waves, characterized for every horizontal
wavenumber pair, (kTx, kTy), by four polarization amplitudes,
n
A±
Th(ω, kTx, kTy), A±
Tv(ω, kTx, kTy)
o
. The transmit plane-
waves interact with the scatterers to produce the incoming
field that is measured by the receive array, which itself
comprises a superposition of plane-waves. The received plane-
waves are characterized by their own polarization amplitudes,
n
A±
Rh(ω, kRx, kRy), A±
Rv(ω, kRx, kRy)
o
. The most general
linear relation between the transmitted field and the received
field is through the action of a 4 × 4 scattering kernel,
K(ω, kRx, kRy, kTx, kTy),
AR(ω, kRx, kRy) =
Z ∞
−∞
Z ∞
−∞
dkTx dkTy
K(ω, kRx, kRy, kTx, kTy)AT(ω, kTx, kTy),
(98)
where
AT(ω, kTx, kTy) =


A+
Th(ω, kTx, kTy)
A+
Tv(ω, kTx, kTy)
A−
Th(ω, kTx, kTy)
A−
Tv(ω, kTx, kTy)

,
AR(ω, kRx, kRy) =


A+
Rh(ω, kRx, kRy)
A+
Rv(ω, kRx, kRy)
A−
Rh(ω, kRx, kRy)
A−
Rv(ω, kRx, kRy)

.
(99)
This formulation is both physically and mathematically exact.
Particular assumptions concerning the scattering kernel re-
sult in a spatially-stationary stochastic model for the prop-
agation. First, assume that neither transmitted nor received
evanescent waves contribute significantly to the propagation,
i.e., the scattering kernel vanishes if either k2
Tx + k2
Ty > κ2
or k2
Rx + k2
Ry > κ2. Second, assume that the sixteen elements
of the scattering kernel are complex Gaussian distributed, and
independent among themselves and independent over the four
wavenumbers. Then the Green’s function for the propagation
is spatially stationary in both transmit and receive coordinates.
This is the generalization of the spectral representation for a
stationary Gaussian random process to spatial random fields.
This formulation results in the most general physically tenable
(e.g., satisfying Maxwell’s equations in free-space) spatially-
stationary stochastic model for propagation.
Isotropic scattering results in a spatial autocorrelation
function for the Green’s function which is proportional to
sinc(κ|pR|) · sinc(κ|pT|) which is equivalent to the Clarke
model [88]. This is as close to i.i.d. Rayleigh fading as could
ever exist, and features the spatial correlation behaviors shown
in Fig. 9 when the antenna spacing is smaller than λ/2 or the
array is planar.
4) Rayleigh-Jeans-Clarke model for ambient thermal noise:
The additive noise in the receiver array can also be spatially
correlated. Classical statistical mechanics, when combined
with elementary wave propagation theory, yields a space/time
model for thermally induced ambient noise [89]. We begin
by considering a resonant chamber, such as a lossless copper
box. The interior of the box supports a countably infinite
number of EM standing-wave (Sturm-Liouville) normal modes
whose tangential electric fields vanish on the boundaries of
the box [90]. According to the Equipartition Theorem, every
energy-storage mode has expected thermal energy equal to
kBT
2 , where kB is Boltzmann’s constant and T is absolute
temperature [91]. The superposition of the modes results in
a Gaussian space/time stochastic process which is stationary
in time, but non-stationary in space due to the boundary
conditions. As the size of the box grows large compared with
the wavelength, the random EM field becomes stationary in
space as well as time. At a given point in space, the tempo-
ral power-density spectrum is proportional to kBTω2, called
the Rayleigh-Jeans spectrum [91]. At a particular temporal
frequency, the spatial autocorrelation function is proportional
to sinc(κ|p|), which is the Clarke autocorrelation [88]. This
Rayleigh-Jeans-Clarke spectrum describes dark-sky noise, and
it represents the minimum EM noise that a receive antenna
would be subject to.
5) Shannon capacity of a wireless link in a resonant cham-
ber: As a case study, consider a transmit antenna and a receive
antenna operating inside a lossless resonant chamber [92]. The
2 × 2 impedance matrix (whose entries are obtained from EM
theory) is purely imaginary, and it has a countably infinite
number of simple poles on the real-ω axis. The transmit
antenna is driven by a current source, subject to bandwidth
and power constraints. The receive antenna is connected to a
load resistor, RL, which in turn is connected to the infinite
impedance input of a voltage amplifier. There are two sources
of noise in the receiver: the additive amplifier noise, and the
Johnson noise of the load resistor, whose voltage spectral
density is equal to 2kBTRL.7
The exercise of computing the channel capacity yields two
surprises: 1) For a fixed transmit power, the capacity increases
7The thermally-induced standing-waves in the resonant chamber do not
constitute noise in addition to the resistor Johnson noise. To include them
would constitute a form of double-counting.
23
without bound as the load resistance, RL, approaches infinity,
despite the Johnson noise spectral density becoming infinite.
2) The Shannon-optimum allocation of transmit power versus
frequency avoids placing power in the vicinity of the resonant
frequencies (e.g., the system poles).
The conclusion is that EM theory governs the channel
modeling in wireless communications, including the available
spatial DoF, interaction between the antennas and scattering
environment, array design, and fundamental thermal noise.
We will take a closer look at several of these aspects in the
remainder of this paper. The general way to expand the DoF is
to increase the array size, but one can also exploit polarization
and adapt the arrays to a specific scattering environment.
VI. CIRCUIT THEORY FOR PHYSICAL CHANNEL
MODELING
The last section provided a comprehensive overview of the
physics governing wireless transmission through Maxwell’s
equations, along with an introduction to the lumped impedance
representation of antennas. Nevertheless, a fundamental chal-
lenge in designing advanced transmission techniques, such as
Massive MIMO systems, stems from the intricate relationship
between array signal processing quantities (e.g., signals from
the analog-to-digital converters (ADCs) or to the digital-
to-analog converters (DACs)) and the resultant fields. This
complexity is heightened by mutual coupling effects among
the antenna elements, making the connection between these
processing quantities and the realized fields complicated [76].
The objective of this section is to describe the analytical
tools necessary to establish this connection and formulate an
end-to-end model of such a communication link. This model
from [93] encompasses both the antenna and radio-frequency
(RF) frontend and leverages fundamental physics, such as the
superposition principle, the conservation of power, and reci-
procity. Throughout this section, for the sake of simplicity in
notation, we may occasionally omit the frequency variable ω.
A complete MIMO transceiver system can be modeled as
a noisy multiport circuit with the mutual MIMO impedance
matrix ZMIMO from (65) as illustrated in Fig. 16. In most prac-
tical systems, the back-scattering effects between the transmit
and receive antennas can be neglected and the unilateral
approximation, where only the forward channel impedance is
taken into account, can be made:
ZMIMO(ω) ≈
 ZT(ω)
0
ZRT(ω)
ZR(ω)

,
(100)
where ZT(ω) is the mutual impedance matrix of the transmit-
ting array and ZR(ω) is the mutual impedance matrix of the
receiving array, while the propagation channel is represented
by the transimpedance ZRT(ω). In the far-field, the latter
matrix can be related to the open circuit radiation responses
of both arrays and the coefficients of the channel directions
ZRT(ω) =
X
k
g(φk, θk, ω)sOC
R (φk, θk, ω)

sOC
T (φk, θk, ω)
T
.
(101)
In Fig. 16, the ambient thermal noise as well as the thermal
noise due to the antenna losses are represented by the vector
ZMIMO
iT,1
iT,2
iT,N
iR,1
iR,2
iR,M
+
−
+
−
+
−
+
−
+
−
+
−
−+
vG,1
R0
−+
vG,2
R0
−+
vG,N
R0
−+
evN,R,1
−+
evLNA,1
eiLNA,1
−+
−+
eiLNA,2
−+
evN,R,M
−+
evLNA,M
eiLNA,M
noiseless
+
−
noiseless
+
−
noiseless
+
−
...
...
vT,1
vT,2
vT,N
vR,1
vR,2
vR,M
evN,R,2
evLNA,2
vL,1
vL,2
vL,M
Tx signal
generator
antenna mutual coupling
Rx extrinsic
noise
Rx LNA
Fig. 16. A linear multiport model of a MIMO communication
system showing the signal generation, antenna mutual cou-
pling, and noise from both extrinsic sources (i.e., picked up
by the antennas) and intrinsic sources (i.e., generated by low-
noise amplifiers and local circuitry).
evN,R. Each transmit amplifier is represented as a Thévenin
equivalent source with a generator open circuit voltage vG,n
and internal resistance R0. Each low-noise amplifier (LNA)
is modeled as a noisy linear two-port network with two
equivalent input noise sources. The noiseless part of the LNA
can be assumed to have open-circuit input and unit voltage
gain, without affecting the communication performance.
Using basic circuit analysis [76], we can establish the
input-output relationship of the MIMO communication system
between the input voltage vG(ω) and the output voltage vL(ω)
as
vL(ω) = H(ω) vG(ω) + n(ω),
(102)
where
H(ω) = ZRT(ω)

ZT(ω) + R0 IN
−1
,
(103a)
n(ω) = evN,R(ω) + evLNA(ω) + ZReiLNA(ω).
(103b)
The characterization of the circuit model in Fig. 16 requires
the specification of the circuit structure of the joint impedance
matrix ZMIMO along with the statistical signal and noise
properties.
A. Antenna circuit models and their key properties
An antenna can be viewed as a wave transformer that
converts (single-mode) guided waves at the terminal ports into
EM fields that propagate in free space and vice versa. The EM
properties of an antenna array are thus characterized by its
radiating/receiving patterns, the space-side scattering pattern,
and the electrical multi-port behavior of its terminals [93],
[94] as depicted in Fig. 17. For simplicity, we simplify the
EM field, typically a complex vector quantity, as a complex-
valued scalar quantity (e.g., considering a single polarization
as we did in Section III). At each accessible port (mth port),
the forward and backward traveling wave phasors along the
antenna feed line are denoted by aα,m and bα,m, respectively,
which are related to the port current and voltages as
24
π
2 −θ
φ
a
a
bα,1
aα,1
bα,m
aα,m
aβ(θ, φ)
bβ(θ, φ)
Fig. 17. Antenna scattering with m accessible ports.
aα = v + R0i
2√R0
=
vG
2√R0
,
bα = v −R0i
2√R0
.
(104)
In the far-field, the angular transmission characteristic of a
specific polarization (i.e., the complex embedded pattern under
reference resistance termination) is defined when the antenna
port m is connected to a wave-source amplitude aα,m (in
√
W)
at port m while all other ports are terminated with R0:
sm(φ, θ) = lim
r→∞−j r ejκr E(m)(φ, θ, r)
aα,m
r
1
Z0
,
(105)
where Z0 =
p
µ0/ϵ0 is the characteristic impedance of
free space and E(m)(φ, θ, r) is the corresponding generated
electrical far-field. The complex patterns of the embedded
elements, denoted as sm(φ, θ), are aggregated to construct
the characteristic response vector sαβ(φ, θ) for receiving and
transmitting. Considering a single polarization, for simplicity,
the overall description of the antenna array can be expressed
through the linear scattering representation on the terminal side
bα = Sααaα +
Z π
0
Z π
−π
sαβ(φ, θ) aβ(φ, θ) sin(θ) dφ dθ,
(106)
where aα ≜[aα,1, . . . , aα,M]T and Sαα is the scattering
matrix. For the space-side, the angular spectra of the outgoing
propagating wave phasors bβ(φ, θ) are expressed as linear
functions of the incoming wave aβ(φ, θ) (= g(φ, θ) · s for
a single source in space) as well as the port incident phasor
bβ(φ, θ) = s
T
αβ(φ, θ)aα+
Z π
0
Z π
−π
sββ(φ, θ, φ′, θ′) aβ(φ′, θ′) sin(θ′) dφ′ dθ′,
(107)
where sββ(φ, θ, φ′, θ′) is the wave back-scattering character-
istic. Ideally, sββ(φ, θ, φ′, θ′) is effectively negligible or is
just considered as part of the fixed environment. Alternatively,
one can use port current and voltage phasors to describe the
antenna instead of wave phasors. Substituting (104) into (106),
we get the alternative impedance-based representation
v = Zi +
Z π
0
Z π
−π
sOC
αβ (φ, θ) aβ(φ, θ) sin(θ) dφ dθ,
(108)
where the impedance matrix is then related to the S-matrix via
the relation
Z = R0(IM −Sαα)−1(IM + Sαα),
(109)
-
+
Vm−1
-
+
Vm
I(z)
z
2a
∆
Fig. 18. Infinite uniform connected co-linear array.
and the open circuit embedded radiation pattern is related to
the terminated radiation pattern as
aOC
αβ (φ, θ) =
1
√R0
(Z + R0IM) sαβ(φ, θ).
(110)
Assuming lossless antennas with the property
SααS
H
αα +
Z π
0
Z π
−π
sαβ(φ, θ)s
H
αβ(φ, θ) sin(θ)dφdθ
|
{z
}
≜B
= IM,
(111)
then a relationship between the embedded pattern coupling
matrix B (also called radiation matrix) and the S-matrix Sαα
is given by
B = IM −SααS
H
αα = UΛU
H.
(112)
Due to reciprocity (i.e., Sαα = ST
αα), we can obtain when all
eigenvalues of B are distinct
Sαα = Udiag(ejα1, . . . , ejαM )(IM −Λ)1/2U
T,
(113)
with arbitrary phases α1, . . . , αM (which are equal if the
antennas are assumed to have identical embedded patterns).
It is worth noting that the port scattering matrix Sαα, the
impedance matrix Z, and the pattern coupling matrix B have
the same eigenvectors but with different eigenvalues.
Antenna mutual coupling, primarily occurring in the re-
active near-field, can be characterized by considering the
complex far-field pattern, up to a diagonal complex rotation.
While this observation seems to be counter-intuitive, it follows
from the uniqueness theorem in electromagnetism, wherein
boundary conditions are specified at infinity. It is crucial to
emphasize that the required patterns for this derivation are the
embedded patterns as opposed to the isolated patterns which
relativizes the usefulness of this observation.
If the antenna is lossy, then (111) becomes an inequality. A
simple way to account for losses is to introduce the loss factor
η ≤1 which defines the antenna efficiency. Accordingly, (113)
becomes
Sαα = Udiag(ejα1, . . . , ejαM ) (ηIM −Λ)1/2 U
T.
(114)
Generally, characterizing the circuit behavior of large an-
tenna arrays across different frequencies through the embedded
pattern is challenging computationally as well as experimen-
tally. In addition, the current distribution is not known in
advance to solve (78) in a straightforward manner. Instead,
some boundary conditions are to be imposed depending on
the antenna structure. In the following, two main analytical
techniques for characterizing the mutual coupling effects are
discussed.
25
1) Infinite arrays: Infinite periodic arrays are generally
more tractable to analyze due to the identical radiation prop-
erties of the elements and the absence of edge effects. As an
example, consider the infinite co-linear one-dimensional array
in Fig. 18, which can be treated as an infinitely long dipole
with multiple feeds. This setup serves as a valuable approxi-
mation for large arrays and is mathematically manageable in
numerous instances, thanks to the periodic structure. The feed
points are periodic infinitesimal gaps distributed along the thin
wire. To find the corresponding admittance matrix, we first
examine the current distribution on a linear cylindrical antenna
center-driven by a delta function generator. For a hollow-
cylindrical antenna with a radius a and infinite length, the
boundary condition in the polar coordinates system along the
center-driven wire is
Ez(ρ = a, z) = −V δ(z),
(115)
where V is the voltage maintained at the driving point z = 0.
By solving (72) in the Fourier domain of z under the above
boundary condition, we obtain the solution (which is a partic-
ular solution of the Pocklington’s integral equation [95])
y(z) = I(z)
V
= 2κ
πZ0
Z ∞
−∞
ejαz
β2J0(βa)H(2)
0 (βa)
dα,
(116)
where β =
√
κ2 −α2, while J0(·) and H(2)
0 (·) are the zero-
order Bessel and Hankel functions. The resulting magnetic
field reads as (c.f. (69))
Hφ,far−field(φ, θ, r) =
sin(θ)e−jκr jκ
4πr
Z ∞
−∞
I(z)
2π
Z 2π
0
e−jκ(z cos(θ)+a sin(θ) cos(φ))dφdz
=
jV e−jκr
πrZ0 sin(θ)H(2)
0 (aκ sin(θ))
.
(117)
Hence, the short-circuit pattern for an excitation port at z = 0
is expressed as
sSC
αβ(φ, θ) = −j r ejκr Hφ,far−field(φ, θ, r)
V
p
Z0
=
1
π√Z0 sin(θ)H(2)
0 (aκ sin(θ))
.
(118)
To derive the impedance description of the infinite co-
linear array, we uniformly discretize the admittance function in
(116) with a sampling spacing of ∆. The periodic admittance
spectrum can subsequently be inverted to form the impedance
function
z[m∆] = Z0∆2
8πκ
Z
2π
∆
0
ejαm∆
∞
P
ℓ=−∞
1
β2
ℓJ0(βℓa)H(2)
0
(βℓa)
dα,
(119)
where βℓ=
q
κ2 −(α −2πℓ
∆)2. In addition, the open-circuit
embedded pattern is obtained similarly as
sOC
αβ (φ, θ) =
sSC
αβ(φ, θ)Z0∆
∞
P
ℓ=−∞
4κ
β2
ℓJ0(βℓa)H(2)
0
(βℓa)
, βℓ=√
κ2−(κ cos(θ)−2πℓ
∆)2.
(120)
The impedance description of the infinite array is more appro-
priate than the admittance one to approximate the actual finite
case since open-circuiting the edge portions of the infinite
array forces the edge currents to decay rapidly to zero rather
than slowly in the shorted array case.
2) Array of identical minimum scattering antennas: The
radiation patterns of embedded elements usually differ from
the patterns emitted by an element when other elements in
the array are absent, known as isolated element patterns,
due to scattering effects from nearby elements. Finding the
impedance matrix Z directly from the isolated far-field ra-
diation pattern is however possible in the case of minimum
scattering antennas [96] based on the result in (90). Minimum
scattering antennas are invisible (or radio-transparent) under
certain reactive termination. In the canonical case, this happens
when the antenna port is open-circuited. This generally means
that the antenna elements, embedded into the array, induce
in the structure individual current distributions within non-
overlapping spheres when fed with current sources. In such a
case, the embedded open circuit patterns are equivalent to the
isolated pattern. Minimum scattering antennas also have other
properties such as identical radiation and scattering patterns
that are symmetrical with respect to the origin [96]. By
changing the variables kx and ky to the angular coordinates,
(90) can be rewritten in terms of normalized isolated radiation
pattern (assumed to be known for complex angles) [96]
Z(ω, p)
Re
 Z(ω, 0)
 = 2
Z 2π
0
Z
π
2 +j∞
0
e−jκeT
r p|siso(φ, θ)|2 sin(θ)dθdφ,
(121)
where the θ integration is taken along the real axis, 0 ≤θ ≤π
2 ,
and then along the line Re(θ) = π
2 , 0 ≤Im(θ) < ∞, with
the normalized isolated angular pattern siso(φ, θ)
Z 2π
0
Z π
0
|siso(φ, θ)|2 sin(θ)dθdφ = 1.
(122)
It is worth mentioning that the result in (121) is also valid
in the non-minimum scattering case if the elements are suf-
ficiently spaced (> λ) [97]. It might be, however, inaccurate
for closely spaced elements.
B. Signal power
The characterizing of signal power is a fundamental aspect
in the analysis and optimization of communication systems.
While in communication theory, mainly the Euclidean norm of
signals is emphasized, reflecting their abstract representations
and mathematical properties, UM-MIMO systems necessitate
an understanding of physical power involving different physi-
cal quantities such as voltages and currents. Here, two different
power metrics can be relevant in the realm of physical-
consistent modeling and analysis: the radiated power and
the maximum available power spectral densities obtained by
taking the signal duration T0 to infinity:
pavail(ω) = 1
2
lim
T0→∞
1
T0
E
n
∥aα(ω)∥2
2
o
=
lim
T0→∞
1
T0
E

∥vG(ω)∥2
2
	
8R0
,
(123)
26
pT(ω) = 1
2
lim
T0→∞
1
T0
E

a
H
α(ω)B(ω)aα(ω)
	
≤
lossy
antenna
1
2
lim
T0→∞
1
T0
E

i
H
T(ω)Re(ZT(ω))iT(ω)
	
≤
Imped.
Mismatch
pavail(ω).
(124)
The radiated power density pT(ω) is usually restricted by
regulatory measures and interference policies, whereas the
available power pavail(ω) is constrained by device/technology
limitations. In the case of perfect matching between the
generator and antenna impedances (ZT = R0I) along with
a lossless array structure, these two powers are equivalent. In
advanced antenna systems, however, impedance mismatching,
structural losses, and technology limitations introduce addi-
tional model complexities that require careful characterization
of the different power limitations and their relevance. At the
same time, it enables flexible signal design as the antenna
structure can serve as spatial filters for blocking unwanted
distortion [98].
C. Noise modeling
1) Background noise of antennas: The multi-port network
ZMIMO is only composed of passive components which can
be assumed to have the same absolute temperature T of the
environment [76]. Therefore, the noise of the joint impedance
matrix ZMIMO originates solely from the thermal agitation of
the electrons flowing inside its all passive components, a.k.a,
thermal noise at the equilibrium temperature T [99]. Due to the
unilateral approximation, the transmit side noise is neglected.
In Fig. 16, the receive noise voltages evN,R(ω) model the
background noise of receive antennas as well as the resistive
losses. When the mutual coupling is taken into account within
the transmit/receive arrays, the correlation between the mth
and m′th receive noise voltages evN,R,m(ω) and evN,R,m′(ω)
taking the signal duration T0 to infinity [99] is
lim
T0→∞
1
T0
E

evN,R,m(ω) ev∗
N,R,m′(ω)
	
= 4 kB T Re
 ZR,mm′
∀m, m′ ∈[1, . . . , M].
(125)
2) The receive LNA model: The LNAs are modeled as
independently noisy frequency flat devices with unit gain. For
the mth amplifier, the spectral second-order statistics of the
noise voltage, evLNA,m(ω), and current, eiLNA,m(ω), generated
inside the LNA are determined using the truncated Fourier
transform:
lim
T0→∞
1
T0
E
n
|evLNA,m(ω)|2o
= 4 kB T Rv,LNA,
(126a)
lim
T0→∞
1
T0
E
n
|eiLNA,m(ω)|2o
= 4 kB T Gi,LNA,
(126b)
lim
T0→∞
1
T0
E
n
eiLNA,m(ω)evLNA,m(ω)∗o
= 4 kB T βLNA.
(126c)
Additionally, at the mth receive antenna, the LNA noise
voltage, evN,LNA,m(ω), is uncorrelated with the receive noise
voltage, evN,R,m(ω). Using (103b) and (125)–(126), the noise
correlation matrix is obtained as:
Rn = 4 kB T
h
Re
 (1 + βLNA)ZR

+ Rv,LNAIM + Gi,LNAZRZ
H
R
i
.
(127)
Generally, noise is spatially correlated due to mutual coupling
effects. However, if the noise from the LNAs dominates or the
antenna structure is lossy (ZR dominated by resistive losses),
then the conventional uncorrelated noise assumption becomes
more justified.
VII. ANTENNA NEAR-FIELD AND POLARIZATION
MODELING
Maxwell’s equations govern not only how fields propagate
through the environment but also how antennas respond to
fields and excitations. In prior works on wireless communi-
cation and array processing, the antenna is generally treated
as an isotropic point source with linear polarization. While
such a point source does not exist in practice, this model is
appropriate under far-field and narrowband assumptions. As
the array sizes grow larger and antennas grow more com-
plex, however, their near-field characteristics and polarization
become increasingly important. In this section, we overview
prior work on realistic array modeling and a novel EM-based
approach developed in [100].
Physically consistent antenna and channel models are crit-
ical in isolating the characteristics of the array from the
channel, understanding antenna effects on MIMO commu-
nications, and designing systems that achieve high capacity
in specific environments. There are several different aspects
to this. Firstly, the radiative near-field of an antenna array
extends much further than that of an individual antenna, as
we elaborated on in Section II. Hence, we need models that
account for the amplitude and phase variations observed at
different antenna elements due to impinging spherical wave-
fronts. Secondly, the antenna polarization must be captured
since it affects both the channel modeling and spatial DoF. The
fundamental EM theory for polarized antennas was provided
in Section V-D, but practical antenna hardware has impair-
ments. Each antenna is designed for a specific polarization
but reacts to both the intended polarization, known as the co-
polarization, and the orthogonal cross-polarization. The ratio
between the strength of these two polarizations is known as the
cross-polarization discrimination and determines how well a
practical antenna can isolate co-polarized signals. The antenna
polarization can be modeled by accounting for both the co-
polarization and cross-polarization gain patterns in the signal
model [101]–[103].
State-of-the-art array models aim to analytically character-
ize all antenna features simultaneously. The array manifold
model in [104] used a generalized array response vector model
that accounts for arbitrary locations, spherical propagation,
and gain patterns. An EM-based array model proposed in
[105] leveraged a Hertzian dipole framework for far-field array
propagation. This framework is extended in [100] to capture
mutual coupling, polarization, and near-field propagation. We
will provide an overview of this model below.
27
A. Electromagnetic-based array model
Electromagnetically, an antenna is a device that converts
electrical currents to fields. Electrical signals are fed into
the antenna, inducing a current distribution throughout the
structure. Let V denote the volume containing the antenna.
For any point p ∈V, we let J(p) be the current density along
the antenna when it is excited by a unit current (we omitted the
time index for simplicity). The radiated electric and magnetic
fields can be computed from J(p) using the magnetic vector
potential A(p) computed as [106]
A(p) = µ0
Z
V
ejκ |p−p′|
4π|p −p′|J(p′)dp′.
(128)
The electric E(p) and the magnetic field H(p) are given by
Maxwell’s equations in (68). The current distribution along the
antenna fully determines the radiated field patterns. Unfortu-
nately, this current distribution can be difficult to obtain in a
tractable form that allows easy computation of the magnetic
vector potential.
To simplify the calculation of the radiated fields, we can
apply a discretization technique to model the antenna as a
number of easily characterized segments. EM computational
software discretizes antenna volumes into smaller portions
to solve complicated problems. We incorporate a similar
approach by partitioning V into K non-overlapping pieces
{Vk}K
k=1 to obtain
A(p) = µ0
K
X
k=1
Z
Vk
ejκ |p−p′|
4π|p −p′|J(p′)dp′.
(129)
We assume that the discretization is fine enough such that the
following two hold: 1) The current distribution over the kth
segment is equal to a constant Jk (i.e., J(p) = Jk for p ∈Vk);
2) Each segment behaves as a point source (i.e., p −p′ = pk
for p′ ∈Vk).
Under these assumptions, (129) can be approximated as
A(p) ≈µ0
K
X
k=1
Z
Vk
ejκ |pk|
4π|pk|Jkdp′.
(130)
= µ0
K
X
k=1
ejκ|pk|
4π|pk|Jk|Vk| ,
(131)
where |Vk| denotes the volume of Vk. The product of the
current distribution and the volume is known as the moment,
and will be denoted as mk = Jk|Vk|. If we define the magnetic
vector potential of the kth segment as Ak(p) = µ0mk
4π|pk|ejκ|pk|,
then we can compute (130) as
A(p) ≈
K
X
k=1
Ak(p).
(132)
In essence, the discretization procedure has converted the
antenna into an array of point sources, each with magnetic
vector potential Ak. The overall fields can therefore be found
from the superposition of the fields from the extended array.
The simplest physically consistent radiating structure is a
point source with constant current, known as a Hertzian dipole.
Each segment of the antenna can be modeled as a Hertzian
dipole with the current determined from the discretization pro-
cedure. The radiated field of a Hertzian dipole can be obtained
in closed form following the derivation in [100], [106]. Let p
have a spherical representation with radial distance r, azimuth
angle ϕ, and elevation angle θ as
p = r[cos(ϕ) cos(θ), sin(ϕ) cos(θ), sin(θ)]
T.
(133)
We define the unit vectors of the spherical orthonormal basis
at p as
ur(p) =

cos(ϕ) cos(θ), sin(ϕ) cos(θ), sin(θ)
T ,
uθ(p) =

−sin(ϕ), cos(ϕ), 0
T ,
uϕ(p) =

−cos(ϕ) cos(θ), −sin(ϕ) cos(θ), sin(θ)
T .
(134)
The electric field of a Hertzian dipole decays with distance
along each spherical coordinate. We define the decaying
amplitudes of the radial and angular components as αrad(p)
and αang(p), which are given by
αrad(p) = e−jκr
jωϵ02π
 1
r3 + jκ
r2

,
(135)
αang(p) = −e−jκr
jωϵ04π
 
1
r3 + jκ
r2 −κ2
r
!
.
(136)
By further defining the 3 × 3 matrix T(p) as the dipole field
transform
T(p) =
 αrad(p)ur(p),
αang(p)uϕ(p),
αang(p)uθ(p) T ,
(137)
the electric field of a Hertzian dipole at the origin with moment
m is given by
Edip(p) = T(p)m.
(138)
Two important properties captured by the Hertzian dipole
model that are not seen in an isotropic point source are the
polarization and the near-field pattern. The Hertzian dipole
has a polarization that is dependent on the orientation of the
moment vector. For example, a moment vector that is aligned
with the z-axis will exhibit a vertically polarized field. The
amplitude variations in the field as a function of distance are
also incorporated into the field expressions through αrad(p)
and αang(p).
The complete antenna response can be obtained by su-
perposing the fields from Hertzian dipoles located at each
segment. To translate the Hertzian dipole response from the
origin to the center of the kth segment, we need to account for
the dependence of the spherical basis on the position. Letting
Q(p) = [ur(p), uϕ(p), uθ(p)] be the rotation matrix at p,
the field at p from a dipole with moment mk located at the
kth segment is
Edip,k(p) = Q(p)Q(pk)T(pk)mk.
(139)
The two rotations serve to express the radiated field in spheri-
cal coordinates with respect to the origin. Letting R(p, pk) =
Q(p)Q(pk), the antenna response becomes
Eant(p) =
K
X
k=1
R(p, pk)T(pk)mk.
(140)
28
Dipole
Bowtie
Meta-antenna
Fig. 19. Examples of the EM characterization of antennas
based on discretization. Each antenna is partitioned into a large
number of segments, each of which is treated as a Hertzian
dipole. The radiated field from each antenna comes from the
combined fields of the dipoles.
The polarization and near-field radiation of the antenna are
characterized by the combined effect of all of the dipole
segments.
The framework can be applied to an antenna array. Consider
an array with N antenna elements excited by the length N
transmit signal x, where the nth antenna is discretized into
Kn segments. Under the same assumptions regarding the size
of the discretization, the kth segment of the nth antenna
can be associated with a point pn,k and a moment vector
mn,k(x). We note that because of mutual coupling, the current
distribution in all of the antennas will depend on the excitation
signal x. The array radiated field can be computed as
Earr(p) =
N
X
n=1
Kn
X
k=1
R(p, pn,k)T(pn,k)mn,k(x).
(141)
We emphasize that the model still functions in the same way
as in the single-antenna case, thus, the total radiated field
is calculated by treating the array structure as a larger array
of Hertzian dipoles. Linearity can also be applied to further
simplify (141). Let en denote the N × 1 vector with 1 on the
nth entry and zeros elsewhere and consider the 3 × N matrix
Mn,k with ℓth column given by mn,k(eℓ). It can be shown
that
Earr(p) =
N
X
n=1
Kn
X
k=1
R(p, pn,k)T(pn,k)Mn,kx.
(142)
This isolates the role of the transmit signal by incorporating
mutual coupling between the array elements into Mn,k.
We end the section with a few notes on the usefulness of this
representation for an antenna array. One of the key benefits is
the flexibility in characterizing arbitrary arrays since we did
not make any assumptions about the structure or shape. Any
type of antenna that can be meshed in the considered manner
can be approximated by the sum of the Hertzian dipoles, as
shown in Fig. 19. In addition, the use of Hertzian dipoles
as the fundamental building blocks of each antenna means
that properties such as the polarization and near-field radiation
patterns of the entire array are natively incorporated into the
linear model.
VIII. ANTENNA ARRAY DESIGN FOR UM-MIMO
The beamfocusing and massive spatial multiplexing charac-
teristics of UM-MIMO systems were discussed in Section II,
but the ability to control them depends on the signal processing
capabilities of the antenna array [107]. The achievable SE
varies between hardware architectures that have the same form
factor. While half-wavelength antenna spacing is the norm
in conventional Massive MIMO systems, a key feature of
UM-MIMO is placing an extremely large number of antennas
in a small aperture area, using spacings much smaller than
λ/2. Although this feature does not inherently increase spatial
DoF, this approach allows for several candidate architecture
designs for spatial efficiency and new functionalities to meet
the extreme requirements of 6G. These designs range from
thousands of discrete antenna elements to methods using meta-
surfaces, and even approaches that make apertures effectively
continuous.
There are many implementation challenges related UM-
MIMO arrays. Firstly, large and dense array structures intro-
duce issues related to mutual coupling, polarization discrimi-
nation, channel estimation, and near-field propagation, which
have been touched upon earlier in this paper. Moreover, the
large number of antennas and reduced spacing, coupled with
novel signal processing techniques, can significantly increase
hardware costs, energy consumption, and complexity in the
production of UM-MIMO systems. The efficient realization
of such high-density arrays has spurred the development of
advanced antenna and device designs for 6G, including using
metamaterials for antenna design or developing flexible fluid
antenna systems. This section explains key antenna array
technologies for 6G UM-MIMO systems, discussing how these
technologies can be designed, their implementation methods,
and potential application areas.
A. Uniform array-based radiation architecture
One might implement a UM-MIMO array by following the
conventional approach with a UPA with discrete elements as
shown in Fig. 20(a). While conventional Massive MIMO at
the BSs typically involves around 64 antennas, UM-MIMO is
envisioned to include many more antennas in the array [40].
This is made possible by making the array aperture larger and
possibly by reducing the spacing between antennas. In [41],
a BS equipped with 40 000 antennas was proposed, and [108]
investigated various antenna spacing values, such as λ/6 and
λ/15. Additionally, structures composed of thousands of patch
antennas have been researched since 5G, including how the
antenna size affects the EM modeling in large arrays [109].
Massive MIMO for the 3.5 GHz band has been implemented
in 5G using the fully digital beamforming architecture shown
in Fig. 20(a). In this structure, each antenna is connected to
a dedicated RF chain, allowing the transceivers to generate
any desirable superposition of near-field and far-field beams,
thus offering high spatial flexibility [110]. This is the ideal
implementation from an SE perspective, but not from a
complexity viewpoint. A fully digital UM-MIMO architecture
requires the use of a large number of RF chains, leading
29
Fig. 20. The four classes of UM-MIMO antenna array architectures. a) Fully-digital architecture, b) Hybrid architecture, c)
CAP MIMO-based architecture, d) DMA-based architecture.
to substantially higher design complexity, energy consump-
tion, and cost. These issues might grow faster than linearly
with the number of antennas; for example, the computational
complexity for interference-suppression beamforming grows
cubically with the number of antennas [15]. In principle, a
fully analog architecture could be utilized that has a single RF
chain that connects to the antennas through phase-shifters, but
this implementation lacks the ability of spatial multiplexing—
the main motivation behind UM-MIMO. Consequently, in-
termediate methods have been proposed that divide large
arrays into several analog sub-arrays [111]. This is specifically
implemented through hybrid processing, which combines the
analog and digital architectures and uses fewer RF chains than
the number of antennas, realized through the connection of
phase shifters and viewed as a promising method to reduce
hardware complexity [112], [113]. This architecture is illus-
trated in Fig. 20(b). These implementation simplifications can
have little impact on the SE when there are more RF chains
than strong multipath clusters in the propagation environment,
which is particularly the case in line-of-sight scenarios.
B. Continuous aperture MIMO system
To achieve full control over the array aperture, continuous-
aperture MIMO (CAP MIMO) architectures are gaining atten-
tion. CAP MIMO is a novel implementation that modulates
information directly in the form of EM waves through a contin-
uous antenna surface, ideally possessing a spatially continuous
EM volume composed of an infinite number of infinitesimally
small antennas as shown in Fig. 20(c). This is also being
researched under the name of holographic MIMO [87], [115]
Fig. 21. Fluid antenna systems and E-field distribution of
the surface wave when the fluid element changes its location
[114].
and differs from traditional discrete antenna arrays by effec-
tively using a continuous antenna aperture, thereby offering
transmission efficiency and application flexibility. Although
the spatial DoF is the same as for a discrete array of the
same size, channel properties such as the singular values of
the channel matrix can be improved within those dimensions.
CAP-based UM-MIMO systems have the capability to gen-
erate and control all current distributions on a spatially contin-
uous surface, and can directly modulate artificially constructed
30
EM waves to radiate into space. This can also be seen as a
specific case of point-antenna-based UPA UM-MIMO from
a mathematical perspective, by considering the limit where
the antenna element sizes approach zero. This can be approxi-
mately realized through the development of metamaterials and
highly flexible reconfigurable antennas, fully leveraging the
physical properties of space propagation to achieve high SE
and energy efficiency. In [116], an antenna structure with a
circular CAP plane of 10 m radius was introduced. The work
in [117] presented a lens antenna with a spatially continuous
aperture, where hundreds of antenna elements were placed
along the focal arc of an EM lens with a radius of 5 m.
The signal processing for discrete MIMO arrays mainly
consists of linear algebra operations, but these turn into
continuous operations when using CAP MIMO. Designing
continuous beampattern functions for CAP MIMO is typically
a non-convex problem, and it is nontrivial to make use of con-
ventional MIMO methods. [118] introduced a pattern division
multiplexing (PDM) technique that addresses these challenges
by transforming the design of continuous pattern functions
into a finite orthogonal basis-based projection length design.
Subsequently, the EM performance comparison between CAP
MIMO and conventional discrete MIMO systems was demon-
strated using a non-asymptotic approach [119]. This technique
provides an efficient means to simultaneously serve multiple
UEs and demonstrates the potential of CAP MIMO systems
in meeting the diverse performance requirements of future
networks.
C. Fluid antenna system
Traditional array designs consist of highly conductive and
static metal elements at fixed locations, whose join radiation
pattern is controlled by modifying the current distribution
over the elements. A fundamentally different approach is fluid
antenna systems (FAS) that can dynamically change shapes
and positions of the radiating elements [120]–[122]. FAS rep-
resents an antenna design capable of reconfiguring characteris-
tics such as shape, position, polarization, and radiation pattern,
based on controllable conductive or dielectric elements. The
flexibility and benefits over traditional solid materials have
led to the emergence of numerous fluid antennas in recent
years [123]–[125]. As seen in Fig. 21, the fluid element can
move the antenna to one of N fixed positions (referred to as
ports) within a predefined space. At any given moment, the
FAS can explore the spatial fading characteristics by moving to
a spatial location with better signal quality to avoid deep fades.
To accomplish this, the FAS must have a fine spatial resolution,
allowing the fluid to optimize for each port, thus requiring
a large N value. Although the spatial footprint of FAS is
small, N can be very large, allowing for diversity across
numerous spatially correlated ports. From a communication
perspective, FAS behaves as an antenna selection system, and
can thus achieve diversity gains that can be comparable to
those obtained with maximum ratio processing [126], [127].
To achieve multiplexing gains, the FAS can make use
of multiple fluid antenna elements (each with N different
ports), which can move independently within a specific non-
overlapping space. The number of elements must be equal to or
Fig. 22. Various metasurface antenna designs. A DMA-based
system that uses metasurface-based antenna arrays [128].
larger than the desired number of layers. The joint optimization
of the elements can be utilized to design a MIMO channel
matrix with advantageous properties for a multiplexing per-
spective. The concept of reconfigurable antennas has been
considered in the communication literature, which contains
algorithms for performance optimization [129]–[132]. FAS is
a potent technology for realizing these visions.
From an implementation perspective, FAS can be fabricated
using liquid metals like eutectic gallium-indium (eGaIn). The
movement of the fluid can be electrically controlled using
methods like electrowetting (EW) or RF MEMS, as used in
displays, and must have a device structure optimized for the
desired radiation pattern [133], [134]. One of the major bottle-
necks of FAS is response time, as the time it takes for the fluid
to move to the desired position significantly impacts commu-
nication performance. While devices with sufficient response
speed have not yet been presented, future improvements are
expected through creative geometric methods. Additionally,
some fluids used in FAS may cause undesirable chemical side
effects, which should be noted. While FAS offers significant
efficiency in terms of space and cost, stability issues must also
be considered.
D. Metasurface-inspired antenna system
The implementation of UM-MIMO using hybrid architec-
tures might lead to lower complexity and energy consumption
than a fully digital architecture but still requires plenty of
analog circuits due to the addition of numerous phase shifters.
In this context, it has been recognized that metasurfaces,
capable of effectively controlling EM properties, can replace
traditional analog beamforming structures [135]. Metasurfaces,
comprising dense arrays of reconfigurable elements smaller
than the wavelength, can precisely and dynamically manip-
ulate EM waves, actively participating in improving signal
transmission and reducing interference. Research analyzing the
Shannon entropy of digitally-coded metasurface communica-
tion systems has also been presented [136].
Metasurfaces have been considered in the EM literature for
decades, and the development can be divided into genera-
tions. Metasurface 1.0 was based on homogeneous periodic
31
structures, Metasurface 2.0 allows spatial modulation with
variable amplitude and phase. Further advancements have led
to Metasurface 3.0, capable of real-time modulation in both
time and space and featuring electrically large arrays that adapt
to environmental changes [137].
Within the latest generation, the term dynamic metasurface
antennas (DMA) has emerged as a promising way of imple-
menting UM-MIMO arrays. This architecture is illustrated in
Fig. 20(d). Comprising densely packed arrays of reconfig-
urable metadevices, DMAs utilize the tuning characteristics
of each unit cell to provide analog signal processing functions
without dedicated analog circuits as shown in Fig. 22. By con-
trolling the amplitude and phase of the DMA elements, they
enable low-power precoding structure that does not require
phase shifters [138].
Furthermore, by exploiting the properties of metadevices
to create an effective medium at much smaller scales than
the wavelength, DMAs can design densely packed antenna
arrays with spacings smaller than half a wavelength, enhancing
beamfocusing with higher efficiency. A major challenge in
implementing DMA-based communication is the Lorentzian-
limited beamforming weights in the analog precoding pro-
cess. Studies have been conducted to optimally adjust these
limited weights [139], [140], with [141] demonstrating that
the proposed approach can reduce the number of RF chains
while achieving most of the beamforming gain. The pa-
per [142] mathematically analyzed how large-scale MIMO
systems using fully digital, hybrid, and DMA architectures
impact beamforming capabilities in the radiative near-field.
Additionally, [128] integrated DFT codebooks with DMAs
in low-power MIMO systems, showing that transmitter sys-
tems using developed DMAs can surpass conventional analog
beamforming systems in terms of SE and energy efficiency. An
energy-efficiency analysis in [143] also demonstrates the ben-
efits of incorporating DMAs into traditional hybrid precoding
architectures. These findings suggest that DMAs, capable of
being packaged in a small physical area for a wide operating
frequency band, hold significant potential as a design that can
surpass conventional beamforming architectures.
IX. INTERPLAY BETWEEN ARRAY DESIGN AND SIGNAL
PROCESSING
The last section described four general categories of array
architectures, which are summarized in Fig. 20. Architectures
(a) and (b), fully digital and hybrid analog/digital, have a long
history in the wireless infrastructure industry. On the other
hand, (c) and (d), namely CAP and DMA, represent more
modern approaches, and only time will reveal whether they
will be implemented in BSs during the 6G life-cycle.
We foresee that the first 6G systems will adopt fully digital
and hybrid architectures, but such UM-MIMO implementa-
tions will face many practical challenges. Improvements in
hardware technology have without doubt made it possible to
equip a BS with around 64 RF chains [144], but commercial
BSs typically have 2-4 times more antenna elements than RF
chains [145].8 Viewed from the perspective of the enormous
number of antenna elements envisioned for UM-MIMO, it
is likely that the number of RF chains will never catch up
with the desired number of antenna elements at a BS. If so, a
fully digital architecture with one element per RF chain will
essentially be relegated to benchmark status only, and hybrid
architectures are the practical ones to consider. However, a hy-
brid architecture is not limited to using analog phase shifters;
rather, with the term hybrid we refer to an architecture that
somehow reduces the signal dimension between the antenna
elements and the baseband processor.
It is essential to use the terms fully digital and hybrid
judiciously. As discussed in Section III, the available spatial
DoF, denoted as η2D in (41), might be smaller than the number
of deployed antenna elements. Consequently, a hybrid archi-
tecture can be lossless in terms of communication performance
only if the number of RF chains is greater or equal to η2D.
Therefore, when referencing a fully digital architecture, it may
implicitly refer to a hybrid one with η2D RF chains.
To identify an immediate issue with having η2D RF chains,
consider a UM-MIMO array implemented on the jumbotron
in a sports venue. Suppose the antenna elements cover an area
A of the jumbotron and the carrier frequency is fc. It follows
from (41) that η2D = A f 2
c π
c2 . For a bandwidth of B Hz, this
produces, at the very minimum, η2DB samples per second as
output from the UM-MIMO array. If we represent each sample
with b bits and forward all this information to a baseband unit
(BBU), the rate at the input to the BBU is
RBBU = ABbf 2
c π
c2
bit/s.
(143)
To appreciate the scale of this rate, we consider the case of
B = 100 MHz, fc = 3 GHz, b = 16, and A = 10 m2. This
results in RBBU ≈5 Tbit/s. At mmWave frequencies with
10 times more spectrum, the rate increases to RBBU ≈5000
Tbit/s. These rates are simply not feasible to implement in
the foreseeable future; hence, the design of high-performing
but lossy hybrid architectures constitutes a promising research
direction.
The remainder of this section will describe ways to co-
design antenna arrays with signal processing algorithms. We
will describe a modular design of hybrid UM-MIMO antennas
and elaborate on the tradeoff between the number of BBU
inputs and the processing at the antenna elements.
A. Modular UM-MIMO design
We will now take a closer look at a UM-MIMO array and
focus on its backplane; that is, the circuitry behind the antenna
elements. Abstractly, we can view the UM-MIMO array as
having several outputs, each connected to the BBU. When
using a hybrid architecture, these outputs correspond to the
RF chains. In a UM-MIMO setup, it is possible to define the
density of these RF chains as µ m−2. Additionally, each RF
chain may be linked only to a subset of the antennas within
8Each RF chain is connected to a subarray with multiple antenna elements,
to achieve a stronger vertical directivity than with a single element. Since no
phase shifters are utilized, this implementation is still called fully digital.
32
Fig. 23. Example of a modular antenna design where only
some panels are connected to the CPU at a given time instance.
the array. We can then define an antenna panel as a group of
antennas, comprising an area Ap m2 to which a given number
Mp of RF chains are connected; clearly, Mp = Apµ. Panel-
based implementations of UM-MIMO antennas are thoroughly
discussed in [146].
For a given rate limitation at the input interface to the BBU,
only a subset of the panels may forward their outputs to the
BBU at a given time instance while the remaining are idle. If
we let τ denote the fraction of the total antenna area, A, that
is active, the total number of RF chains connected to the BBU
becomes
M = τA
Ap
Mp = τA
Ap
Apµ = Aτµ.
(144)
A basic example is provided in Fig. 23, where four panels,
each of area Ap are equipped with Mp = 2 RF chains. We
consider τ = 0.5, which implies that at most τA/Ap = 2
panels may be active (i.e., forward their outputs to the BBU)
at any given time. The total number of RF chains connected to
the BBU at a given time becomes M = MpτA/Ap = 4. The
connection between each panel and the BBU is digital and
managed by a local processing unit (LPU); thus, there are no
physical switches in the array but only a control mechanism
that determines which LPUs forward signals to the BBU.
The preferable selection of the parameters τ and µ depends
on the deployment scenario. Choosing a very large µ (i.e.,
letting each panel have a large number of RF chains), implies
that τ must be reduced to satisfy a given rate constraint on the
BBU input. This may be favorable in case the UEs are believed
to appear in hotspots (i.e., small subsets of the coverage
area) so that they all have good propagation characteristics
to the same panels. However, if the UEs are fairly uniformly
distributed over the coverage area, then a small τ (i.e., only a
few panels are active), may not be a good choice.
Ultimately, striking a good balance between τ and µ is
not a problem that has an analytical solution, but rather
requires extensive system simulations—possibly considering a
digital twin of the intended deployment area. Let the metric(s)
of interest be denoted by c, and possibly be vector-valued.
This may be the ergodic channel capacity, outage capacity,
or any other metric of choice. What quantities/settings do c
depend on? First of all, it strongly depends on the propagation
environment and user distribution, which is why a numerical
approach is required. Secondly, it depends on various fixed
parameters such as the carrier frequency, bandwidth, available
deployment area A of the array, etc. Thirdly, it depends on
the type of signal processing performed at the LPU. This can
range from purely analog beamforming (e.g., using phase-
shifters and signal combiners) to a fully digital LPU that
can refine/compress the complex baseband samples. Lastly,
it depends on the quantities τ, µ, and Ap; therefore, we
express the metric as c(τ, µ, Ap) with the remark that all other
properties discussed are held constant. Despite the fact that
Ap does not show up in (144), it does impact the overall
performance as it impacts the quality of the LPU outputs.
Rule-of-thumbs for selecting τ and µ in a line-of-sight-
dominant propagation environment were obtained in [147] by
extensive simulations. These show a linear relation between
the number of BBU inputs and the number of UEs and active
panels. Further work is required to determine the generality
of these results.
The signal processing that is performed at each LPU to
limit the flow of data to the BBU can also be optimized; for
example, to reduce the dimensionality while retaining most of
the performance. This problem is studied in [148], [149] with
a star-topology between the BBU and LPU, while sequential
topologies were considered in [150].
X. FINAL REMARKS AND OPEN CHALLENGES
Many new technology components are envisioned for 6G
networks, but one that surely will play a key role is MIMO. An
educated guess is that we will first see 6G MIMO in the upper
mid-band (from 6-15 GHz), where 512 to 2048 antennas per
array are within practical reach. The success of the technology
is tightly connected to scientific and hardware maturity, and
many grand challenges remain to be tackled. We will end this
paper by describing eight such challenges:
1) Beamfocusing in realistic environments: We showed
how near-field effects improve the spatial multiplexing
capabilities in line-of-sight scenarios. How prominent
are these effects in more realistic environments?
2) Fixed-complexity BBU processing: The interface be-
tween antennas and BBU will be limited in practice, as
well as the computational capabilities. How can LPUs
reduce the signal dimensionality to harness the benefits
of having many antennas with a fixed-complexity BBU?
3) Energy-efficient operation: The energy consumption of
UM-MIMO will likely be higher than that of 5G MIMO,
but the energy per bit can be substantially smaller when
massive multiplexing is performed. However, intelligent
sleep features are required to achieve energy efficiency
when the traffic load is small (e.g., at night).
4) Channel estimation: Channel coefficients must be es-
timated in every coherence block. Does this impose a
fundamental limit on the useful spatial DoF? How does
33
the limit depend on the available side-information in the
estimator?
5) Array topology: How to optimize the antenna number
and spacing for a given area by considering mutual
coupling and polarization effects? How to incorporate
antenna reconfigurability and different kinds of array
architectures?
6) Distortion-aware processing: Physical-consistent hard-
ware and noise modeling, as well as RF impairments,
make the end-to-end system model different than in
textbooks. Can these “distortions” be overcome through
digital processing?
7) Continuous processing: The CAP and DMA architec-
tures enable nearly continuous spatial processing over
the aperture, but under specific phase and amplitude con-
straints. How can advanced spatial multiplexing methods
(e.g., zero-forcing) be implemented in these cases, where
the matrix operations have infinite dimensions?
8) Field trials: Although near-field effects and their conse-
quences can be simulated using EM-compliant models,
true confidence in the technology is obtained through
testbeds and measurements. UM-MIMO pushes the lim-
its in terms of the cost and size of such field trials.
Antenna designers and communication engineers must
come together to overcome these challenges.
REFERENCES
[1] E. F. W. Alexanderson, “Transatlantic radio communication,” Trans.
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 1269–
1285, 1919.
[2] P. Bondyopadhyay, “The first application of array antenna,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Phased Array Systems and Tech., 2000, pp. 29–32.
[3] H. O. Peterson, H. H. Beverage, and J. B. Moore, “Diversity telephone
receiving system of R.C.A. communications, Inc.” IRE, vol. 19, no. 4,
pp. 562–584, 1931.
[4] H. T. Friis and C. B. Feldman, “A multiple unit steerable antenna for
short-wave reception,” IRE, vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 841–917, 1937.
[5] S. M. Alamouti, “A simple transmit diversity technique for wireless
communications,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 8, pp.
1451–1458, 1998.
[6] V. Tarokh, H. Jafarkhani, and A. Calderbank, “Space-time block codes
from orthogonal designs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 5, pp.
1456–1467, 1999.
[7] B. M. Hochwald, T. L. Marzetta, and V. Tarokh, “Multiple-antenna
channel hardening and its implications for rate feedback and schedul-
ing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 1893–1909, 2004.
[8] J. H. Winters, “Optimum combining for indoor radio systems with
multiple users,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 35, no. 11, pp. 1222–1230,
1987.
[9] S. C. Swales, M. A. Beach, D. J. Edwards, and J. P. McGeehan, “The
performance enhancement of multibeam adaptive base-station antennas
for cellular land mobile radio systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 56–67, 1990.
[10] G. J. Foschini and M. J. Gans, “On limits of wireless communications
in a fading environment when using multiple antennas,” Wireless
Personal Commun., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 311–335, 1998.
[11] E. Telatar, “Capacity of multi-antenna Gaussian channels,” European
Trans. Telecom., vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 585–595, 1999.
[12] D. Gesbert, M. Kountouris, R. W. Heath, Jr., C.-B. Chae, and T. Salzer,
“Shifting the MIMO paradigm,” IEEE Signal. Process. Mag., vol. 24,
no. 5, pp. 36–46, 2008.
[13] T. L. Marzetta, “Noncooperative cellular wireless with unlimited num-
bers of base station antennas,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 9,
no. 11, pp. 3590–3600, 2010.
[14] E. Björnson, E. G. Larsson, and T. L. Marzetta, “Massive MIMO: Ten
myths and one critical question,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 54, no. 2,
pp. 114–123, Feb. 2016.
[15] E. Björnson, J. Hoydis, and L. Sanguinetti, “Massive MIMO networks:
Spectral, energy, and hardware efficiency,” Foundations and Trends in
Signal Processing, vol. 11, no. 3-4, pp. 154–655, 2017.
[16] Ericsson, “Ericsson mobility report,” Nov. 2023. [Online]. Available:
http://www.ericsson.com/mobility-report
[17] C. E. Shannon, “Communication in the presence of noise,” IRE, vol. 37,
no. 1, pp. 10–21, 1949.
[18] T. L. Marzetta, E. G. Larsson, H. Yang, and H. Q. Ngo, Fundamentals
of Massive MIMO.
Cambridge University Press, 2016.
[19] E. Björnson, L. Sanguinetti, H. Wymeersch, J. Hoydis, and T. L.
Marzetta, “Massive MIMO is a reality—What is next? Five promising
research directions for antenna arrays,” Digital Signal Processing,
vol. 94, pp. 3–20, 2019.
[20] Z. Wang, J. Zhang, H. Du, W. E. I. Sha, B. Ai, D. Niyato, and
M. Debbah, “Extremely large-scale MIMO: Fundamentals, challenges,
solutions, and future directions,” IEEE Wireless Commun., 2023.
[21] M. Cui, Z. Wu, Y. Lu, X. Wei, and L. Dai, “Near-field MIMO
communications for 6G: Fundamentals, challenges, potentials, and
future directions,” IEEE Commun. Mag, vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 40–46,
2022.
[22] M. Uusitalo et al., “Rfocus: Beamforming using thousands of passive
antennas,” in Proc. USENIX symposium on networked systems design
and implementation (NSDI), 2020, pp. 1047–1061.
[23] M. Cui and L. Dai, “Channel estimation for extremely large-scale
MIMO: Far-field or near-field?” IEEE Trans. on Commun., vol. 70,
no. 4, pp. 2663–2677, 2022.
[24] D. Dardari, “Communicating with large intelligent surfaces: Fundamen-
tal limits and models,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 38, no. 11,
pp. 2526–2537, 2020.
[25] H. T. Friis, “A note on a simple transmission formula,” IRE, vol. 34,
no. 5, pp. 254–256, 1946.
[26] K. T. Selvan and R. Janaswamy, “Fraunhofer and Fresnel distances:
Unified derivation for aperture antennas,” IEEE Antennas Propag.
Mag., vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 12–15, 2017.
[27] C. A. Balanis, Antenna theory: Analysis and design.
John Wiley &
Sons, 2015.
[28] J. Sherman, “Properties of focused apertures in the Fresnel region,”
IRE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 399–408, 1962.
[29] E. Björnson and L. Sanguinetti, “Power scaling laws and near-field
behaviors of massive MIMO and intelligent reflecting surfaces,” IEEE
Open J. Commun. Soc., vol. 1, pp. 1306–1324, 2020.
[30] A. Kay, “Near-field gain of aperture antennas,” IRE Trans. Antennas
Propag., vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 586–593, 1960.
[31] E. Björnson, Ö. T. Demir, and L. Sanguinetti, “A primer on near-
field beamforming for arrays and reconfigurable intelligent surfaces,”
in Proc. Asilomar Conf. on Signals, Systems, and Computers, 2021,
pp. 105–112.
[32] X. Gao, O. Edfors, F. Tufvesson, and E. G. Larsson, “Massive MIMO
in real propagation environments: Do all antennas contribute equally?”
IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 11, pp. 3917–3928, 2015.
[33] C. Polk, “Optical Fresnel-zone gain of a rectangular aperture,” IRE
Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 65–69, 1956.
[34] T. Kwon, Y.-G. Lim, B. Min, and C.-B. Chae, “RF lens-embedded
massive MIMO systems: Fabrication issues and codebook design,”
IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 64, no. 7, pp. 2256–2271,
July 2016.
[35] Y.-J. Cho, G.-Y. Suk, B. Kim, D.-K. Kim, and C.-B. Chae, “RF lens em-
bedded antenna array for mmWave MIMO: Design and performance,”
IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 42–48, July 2018.
[36] S.-H. Park, S.-M. Kim, S. Kim, H.-I. Yoo, B. Kim, and C.-B. Chae,
“A transparent antenna system for in-building networks,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), 2022.
[37] F. Pirz, “Design of a wideband, constant beamwidth, array microphone
for use in the near field,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 58, no. 8, pp. 1839–
1850, Oct. 1979.
[38] J. Ryan and R. Goubran, “Near-field beamforming for microphone
arrays,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process.,
vol. 1, Munich, Germany, Apr. 1997, pp. 363–366.
[39] S. Nordholm, V. Rehbock, K. Tee, and S. Nordebo, “Chebyshev
optimization for the design of broadband beamformers in the near
field,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II: Analog Digit. Signal Process.,
vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 141–143, Jan. 1998.
[40] N. J. Myers and R. W. Heath, “InFocus: A spatial coding technique
to mitigate misfocus in near-field LoS beamforming,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 2193–2209, Apr. 2022.
34
[41] H. Lu and Y. Zeng, “Near-field modeling and performance analysis
for multi-user extremely large-scale MIMO communication,” IEEE
Commun. Lett, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 277–281, 2021.
[42] B. Friedlander, “Localization of signals in the near-field of an antenna
array,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 67, no. 15, pp. 3885–3893,
Aug. 2019.
[43] S. Phang, M. T. Ivrlaˇc, G. Gradoni, S. C. Creagh, G. Tanner, and
J. A. Nossek, “Near-field MIMO communication links,” IEEE Trans.
Circuits Syst. I: Regul. Pap., vol. 65, no. 9, pp. 3027–3036, 2018.
[44] N. Deshpande, M. R. Castellanos, S. R. Khosravirad, J. Du,
H. Viswanathan, and R. W. Heath, “A wideband generalization of
the near-field region for extremely large phased-arrays,” IEEE Wireless
Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 515–519, Mar. 2023.
[45] G. Bacci, L. Sanguinetti, and E. Björnson, “Spherical wavefronts
improve MU-MIMO spectral efficiency when using electrically large
arrays,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 7, pp. 1219–1223,
2023.
[46] F. Bohagen, P. Orten, and G. E. Oien, “Design of optimal high-rank
line-of-sight MIMO channels,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 6,
no. 4, pp. 1420–1425, 2007.
[47] E. Torkildson, U. Madhow, and M. Rodwell, “Indoor millimeter wave
MIMO: Feasibility and performance,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
vol. 10, no. 12, pp. 4150–4160, 2011.
[48] H. Do, N. Lee, and A. Lozano, “Reconfigurable ULAs for line-of-sight
MIMO transmission,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 5,
pp. 2933–2947, 2021.
[49] D. Tse and P. Viswanath, Fundamentals of wireless communications.
Cambridge University Press, 2005.
[50] G. Caire and S. Shamai, “On the achievable throughput of a multi-
antenna Gaussian broadcast channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49,
no. 7, pp. 1691–1706, 2003.
[51] A. Goldsmith, S. A. Jafar, N. Jindal, and S. Vishwanath, “Capacity
limits of MIMO channels,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 21, no. 5,
pp. 684–702, 2003.
[52] P. Viswanath and D. N. C. Tse, “Sum capacity of the vector Gaussian
broadcast channel and uplink-downlink duality,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Theory, vol. 49, no. 8, pp. 1912–1921, 2003.
[53] O. Bucci and G. Franceschetti, “On the spatial bandwidth of scattered
fields,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 1445–1455,
1987.
[54] O. Bucci, C. Gennarelli, and C. Savarese, “Representation of electro-
magnetic fields over arbitrary surfaces by a finite and nonredundant
number of samples,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 46, no. 3,
pp. 351–359, 1998.
[55] A. M. Sayeed, “Deconstructing multiantenna fading channels,” IEEE
Trans. Signal Process., vol. 50, no. 10, pp. 2563–2579, 2002.
[56] A. S. Y. Poon, R. W. Brodersen, and D. N. C. Tse, “Degrees of freedom
in multiple-antenna channels: A signal space approach,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 523–536, 2005.
[57] R. A. Kennedy, P. Sadeghi, T. D. Abhayapala, and H. M. Jones,
“Intrinsic limits of dimensionality and richness in random multipath
fields,” IEEE Trans. Signal Processing, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 2542–2556,
2007.
[58] L. W. Hanlen and T. D. Abhayapala, “Space-time-frequency degrees
of freedom: Fundamental limits for spatial information,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, 2007, pp. 701–705.
[59] M. Franceschetti, Wave Theory of Information.
Cambridge University
Press, 2017.
[60] S. Hu, F. Rusek, and O. Edfors, “Beyond massive MIMO: The potential
of data transmission with large intelligent surfaces,” IEEE Trans. Signal
Process., vol. 66, no. 10, pp. 2746–2758, 2018.
[61] A. Pizzo, T. L. Marzetta, and L. Sanguinetti, “Degrees of freedom of
holographic MIMO channels,” in IEEE Int. Workshop on Sig. Proc.
Advances in Wireless Commun. (SPAWC), 2020, pp. 1–5.
[62] A. Pizzo, A. d. J. Torres, L. Sanguinetti, and T. L. Marzetta, “Nyquist
sampling and degrees of freedom of electromagnetic fields,” IEEE
Trans. Signal Process., vol. 70, pp. 3935–3947, 2022.
[63] A. Pizzo and A. Lozano, “On Landau’s eigenvalue theorem for line-of-
sight MIMO channels,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett, vol. 11, no. 12,
pp. 2565–2569, 2022.
[64] W. C. Chew, Waves and fields in inhomogenous media.
Wiley-IEEE
Press, 1995.
[65] S. M. Kay, Fundamentals of statistical signal processing: Estimation
theory.
Prentice Hall, 1993.
[66] J. Kotecha and A. Sayeed, “Transmit signal design for optimal esti-
mation of correlated MIMO channels,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process.,
vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 546–557, 2004.
[67] Ö. T. Demir, E. Björnson, and L. Sanguinetti, “Channel modeling and
channel estimation for holographic massive MIMO with planar arrays,”
IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett, vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 997–1001, 2022.
[68] Ö. T. Demir, E. Björnson, and L. Sanguinetti, “Exploiting array
geometry for reduced-subspace channel estimation in RIS-aided com-
munications,” in Proc. IEEE Sens. Array Multichannel Signal Process.
Workshop (SAM), 2022, pp. 455–459.
[69] Z. Gao, L. Dai, S. Han, I. Chih-Lin, Z. Wang, and L. Hanzo, “Compres-
sive sensing techniques for next-generation wireless communications,”
IEEE Wirel. Commun, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 144–153, 2018.
[70] C. You, Y. Zhang, C. Wu, Y. Zeng, B. Zheng, L. Chen, L. Dai, and A. L.
Swindlehurst, “Near-field beam management for extremely large-scale
array communications,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.16206, 2023.
[71] Ö. T. Demir and E. Björnson, “A new polar-domain dictionary design
for the near-field region of extremely large aperture arrays,” in IEEE
CAMSAP, 2023.
[72] Z. Wu and L. Dai, “Multiple access for near-field communications:
SDMA or LDMA?” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., 2023.
[73] S. S. Yuan, Z. He, X. Chen, C. Huang, and E. Wei, “Electromagnetic
effective degree of freedom of an MIMO system in free space,” IEEE
Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 446–450, 2021.
[74] S. Sun and M. Tao, “Characteristics of channel eigenvalues and mutual
coupling effects for holographic reconfigurable intelligent surfaces,”
Sensors, vol. 22, no. 14, p. 5297, 2022.
[75] T. L. Marzetta, E. G. Larsson, and T. B. Hansen, "Massive MIMO
and Beyond" in Information Theoretic Perspectives on 5G Systems
and Beyond, I. Maric, O. Simeone, S. Shamai (editors).
Cambridge
University Press, 2019.
[76] M. T. Ivrlac and J. A. Nossek, “Toward a circuit theory of commu-
nication,” IEEE. Trans. Circuits and Systems, vol. 57, pp. 1663–1683,
2010.
[77] D. C. Youla, Theory and Synthesis of Linear Passive Time-Invariant
Networks.
Cambridge University Press, 2015.
[78] T. B. Hansen and A. D. Yaghjian, Plane-Wave Theory of Time-Domain
Fields: Near-Field Scanning Applications.
Wiley-IEEE Press, 1999.
[79] H. Weyl, “Ausbreitung elektromagnetischer wellen über einen ebenen
leiter,” Ann. Physik, vol. 60, pp. 481–500, 1919.
[80] T. L. Marzetta, “Fundamental limitations on the capacity of wireless
links that use polarimetric antenna arrays,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp.
Inf. Theory, 2002, p. 51.
[81] Y. Li, H. Wang, and X.-G. Xia, “On quasi-orthogonal space-time
block codes for dual-polarized MIMO channels,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 397–407, Jan. 2012.
[82] T. Kim, B. Clerckx, D. J. Love, and S. J. Kim, “Limited feedback beam-
forming systems for dual-polarized MIMO channels,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 3425–3439, Nov. 2010.
[83] N. Amitay and J. Salz, “Linear equalization theory in digital data
transmission over dually polarized fading radio channels,” Bell Labs
Tech. J., vol. 63, no. 10, pp. 2215–2259, 1984.
[84] S. A. Schelkunoff, “A mathematical theory of linear arrays,” The Bell
System Technical Journal, vol. 22, 1943.
[85] A. Uzkof, “An approach to the problem of optimum directive antenna
design„” Comptes Rendus (Doklady) de l’Academie des Sci. de l’URSS,
vol. 53, pp. 35–38, 1946.
[86] T. L. Marzetta, “Super-directive antenna arrays: Fundamentals and
new perspectives,” Proc. Asilomar Conf. on Signals, Systems, and
Computers, 2019.
[87] A. Pizzo, T. L. Marzetta, and L. Sanguinetti, “Spatially-stationary
model for holographic MIMO small-scale fading,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun., vol. 38, pp. 1964–1979, 2020.
[88] R. H. Clarke, “A statistical theory of mobile-radio reception,” Bell
System Technical Journal, pp. 957–1000, 1968.
[89] T. L. Marzetta and T. B. Hansen, “Rayleigh-Jeans-Clarke model for
wireless noise in a resonant cavity: Scalar case,” Proc. IEEE Global
Commun. Conf. (Globecom), 2022.
[90] P. M. Morse and H. Feshbach, Methods of Theoretical Physics.
McGraw-Hill, 1953.
[91] G. Joos, Theoretical Physics.
Glasgow: I. M. Freeman, Blackie &
Son Ltd, 1934.
[92] A. Singh and T. L. Marzetta, “Shannon theory for wireless communi-
cation in a resonant chamber,” accepted to IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun.
Special Issue on Electromagnetic Info. Theory, 2023.
[93] A. Mezghani, M. Akrout, M. R. Castellanos, S. Saab, B. Hochwald,
R. W. Heath, and J. A. Nossek, “Reincorporating circuit theory into
information theory,” IEEE BITS Inf. Theory Mag., pp. 1–17, Dec. 2023.
35
[94] D. M. Kerns and E. S. Dayhoff, “Theory of diffraction in microwave
interferometry,” Journal of Research of the National Bureau of Stan-
dards Section B Mathematics and Mathematical Physics, p. 1, 1960.
[95] H. C. Pocklington, “Electrical oscillations in wire,” Cambridge Philos.
Soc. Proc., vol. 9, pp. 324–332, 1897.
[96] W. Wasylkiwskyj and W. Kahn, “Theory of mutual coupling among
minimum-scattering antennas,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 18,
no. 2, pp. 204–216, 1970.
[97] ——, “Scattering properties and mutual coupling of antennas with
prescribed radiation pattern,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and
Propagation, vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 741–752, 1970.
[98] A. Mezghani and R. W. Heath, Jr., “Massive MIMO precoding and
spectral shaping with low resolution phase-only DACs and active
constellation extension,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 21, no. 7,
pp. 5265–5278, 2022.
[99] H. Nyquist, “Thermal agitation of electric charge in conductors,”
Physical review, vol. 32, no. 1, p. 110, 1928.
[100] M. R. Castellanos and R. W. Heath, “Electromagnetic manifold char-
acterization of antenna arrays,” submitted to IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., Oct. 2023.
[101] R. Bhagavatula, C. Oestges, and R. W. Heath, “A new double-
directional channel model including antenna patterns, array orientation,
and depolarization,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 59, no. 5, pp.
2219–2231, Jun. 2010.
[102] M. R. Castellanos and R. W. Heath, “Linear polarization optimization
for wideband MIMO systems with reconfigurable arrays,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun., pp. 1–14, Nov. 2023.
[103] B. Friedlander, “Polarization sensitivity of antenna arrays,” IEEE Trans.
Signal Process., vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 234–244, Jan. 2019.
[104] G. Efstathopoulos and A. Manikas, “Extended array manifolds: Func-
tions of array manifolds,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 59, no. 7,
pp. 3272–3287, Jul. 2011.
[105] B. Friedlander, “The extended manifold for antenna arrays,” IEEE
Trans. Signal Process., vol. 68, pp. 493–502, Jan. 2020.
[106] W. L. Stutzman and G. A. Thiele, Antenna theory and design.
John
Wiley & Sons, 2012.
[107] A. Buffi, P. Nepa, and G. Manara, “Design criteria for near-field-
focused planar arrays,” IEEE Antennas Propag. Mag, vol. 54, no. 1,
pp. 40–50, 2012.
[108] L. Wei, C. Huang, G. C. Alexandropoulos, W. E. I. Sha, Z. Zhang,
M. Debbah, and C. Yuen, “Multi-user holographic MIMO surfaces:
Channel modeling and spectral efficiency analysis,” IEEE J. Sel. Top.
Signal Process., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 1112–1124, 2022.
[109] H. Lu and Y. Zeng, “Communicating with extremely large-scale ar-
ray/surface: Unified modeling and performance analysis,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 4039–4053, 2021.
[110] X. Zhang, A. F. Molisch, and S.-Y. Kung, “Variable-phase-shift-based
RF-baseband codesign for MIMO antenna selection,” IEEE Trans.
Signal Process, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 4091–4103, 2005.
[111] J. de Souza, A. Amiri, T. Abrao, E. de Carvalho, and P. Popovski,
“Quasi-distributed antenna selection for spectral efficiency maximiza-
tion in subarray switching XL-MIMO systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol, vol. 70, no. 7, pp. 6713–6725, 2021.
[112] F. Sohrabi and W. Yu, “Hybrid digital and analog beamforming design
for large-scale antenna arrays,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. Signal Process.,
vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 501–513, 2016.
[113] S. S. Ioushua and Y. C. Eldar, “A family of hybrid analog–digital
beamforming methods for massive MIMO systems,” IEEE Trans.
Signal Process, vol. 67, no. 12, pp. 3243–3257, 2019.
[114] K.-K. Wong, A. Shojaeifard, K. F. Tong, and Y. Zhang, “Fluid antenna
systems,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 1950–
1962, 2020.
[115] L. Sanguinetti, A. A. D. Amico, and M. Debbah, “Wavenumber-
division multiplexing in line-of-sight holographic MIMO communi-
cations,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun, 2022.
[116] S. Hu, F. Rusek, and O. Edfors, “Beyond massive MIMO: The potential
of positioning with large intelligent surfaces,” IEEE Trans. Signal
Process, vol. 66, no. 7, pp. 1761–1774, 2018.
[117] J. Yang, Y. Zeng, S. Jin, C.-K. Wen, and P. Xu, “Communication
and localization with extremely large lens antenna array,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun, vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 3031–3048, 2021.
[118] Z. Zhang and L. Dai, “Pattern-division multiplexing for multi-user
continuous-aperture MIMO,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun, 2023.
[119] Z. Wan, J. Zhu, and L. Dai, “Performance comparison between
continuous aperture MIMO and discrete MIMO,” in Proc. IEEE Global
Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), 2023.
[120] K.-K. Wong, W. K. New, X. Hao, K.-F. Tong, and C.-B. Chae, “Fluid
antenna system—part I: Preliminaries,” IEEE Commun. Letters, vol. 27,
no. 8, pp. 1919–1923, Aug. 2023.
[121] K.-K. Wong, K.-F. Tong, and C.-B. Chae, “Fluid antenna system—part
II: Research opportunities,” IEEE Commun. Letters, vol. 27, no. 8, pp.
1924–1928, Aug. 2023.
[122] K.-K. Wong, K.-F. Tong, and C.-B. Chae, “Fluid antenna system—part
III: A new paradigm of distributed artificial scattering surfaces for
massive connectivity,” IEEE Commun. Letters, vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 1929–
1933, Aug. 2023.
[123] G. J. Hayes, J. Ju-Hee So, A. Qusba, M. D. Dickey, and G. Lazzi,
“Flexible liquid metal alloy (EGaIn) microstrip patch antenna,” IEEE
Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 60, no. 5, pp. 2151–2156, 2012.
[124] A. Dey, R. Guldiken, and G. Mumcu, “Microfluidically reconfigured
wideband frequency-tunable liquid-metal monopole antenna,” IEEE
Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 64, no. 6, pp. 2572–2576, 2016.
[125] A. Singh, I. Goode, and C. E. Saavedra, “A multistate frequency re-
configurable monopole antenna using fluidic channels,” IEEE Antennas
Wirel. Propag. Lett, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 856–860, 2019.
[126] K.-K. Wong, K. F. Tong, Y. Shen, Y. Chen, and Y. Zhang, “Bruce lee-
inspired fluid antenna system: Six research topics and the potentials
for 6G,” Frontiers in Commun. Net, vol. 3, pp. 1–32, 2022.
[127] W. K. New, K.-K. Wong, H. Xu, K. F. Tong, and C.-B. Chae, “Fluid
antenna system: New insights on outage probability and diversity gain,”
IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun, 2023.
[128] J. M. Carlson, M. R. Castellanos, and R. W. Heath. Jr., “Dynamic
metasurface antennas for energy-efficient MISO communications,” in
Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (IEEE GLOBECOM), 2023.
[129] J. D. Boerman and J. T. Bernhard, “Performance study of pattern
reconfigurable antennas in MIMO communication systems,” IEEE
Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 231–236, Jan. 2008.
[130] D. Piazza, N. J. Kirsch, A. Forenza, R. W. Heath, and K. R. Dandekar,
“Design and evaluation of a reconfigurable antenna array for MIMO
systems,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 869–881,
Mar. 2008.
[131] A. M. Sayeed and V. Raghavan, “Maximizing MIMO capacity in sparse
multipath with reconfigurable antenna arrays,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 156–166, Jun. 2007.
[132] M. Hasan, ˙I. Bahçeci, and B. A. Cetiner, “Downlink multi-user MIMO
transmission for radiation pattern reconfigurable antenna systems,”
IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 17, no. 10, pp. 6448–6463, Oct.
2018.
[133] H. Wang, Y. Shen, K. F. Tong, and K.-K. Wong, “Continuous elec-
trowetting surface-wave fluid antenna for mobile communications,” in
Proc. IEEE Region 10 Conference (TENCON), 2022, pp. 1–3.
[134] P. K. Nisar et al., “Liquid metal antennas: Materials, fabrication and
applications,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 1, p. 177, 2019.
[135] J. Wang et al., “Metantenna: When metasurface meets antenna again,”
IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 1332–1347, 2020.
[136] T. J. Cui, S. Liu, and L. L. Li, “Information entropy of coding
metasurface,” Light: Science & Applications, vol. 5, no. 11, 2016.
[137] M. Barbuto et al., “Metasurfaces 3.0: a new paradigm for enabling
smart electromagnetic environments,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag.,
vol. 70, no. 10, pp. 8883–8897, 2021.
[138] R. L. Haupt and M. Lanagan, “Reconfigurable antennas,” IEEE Anten-
nas Propag. Mag, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 49–61, 2013.
[139] D. R. Smith, O. Yurduseven, L. P. Mancera, P. Bowen, and N. B.
Kundtz, “Analysis of a waveguide-fed metasurface antenna,” Phys. Rev.
Appl, vol. 8, no. 5, p. 054048, 2017.
[140] L. You, J. Xu, G. C. Alexandropoulos, J. Wang, W. Wang, and X. Gao,
“Energy efficiency maximization of massive MIMO communications
with dynamic metasurface antennas,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun,
vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 393–407, 2022.
[141] W. Huang et al., “Joint microstrip selection and beamforming design
for mmwave systems with dynamic metasurface antennas,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Sig. Proc. (ICASSP), 2023, pp. 1–5.
[142] H. Zhang et al., “Beam focusing for near-field multiuser MIMO
communications,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun, vol. 21, no. 9, pp.
7476–7490, 2022.
[143] M. R. Castellanos, J. Carlson, and R. W. Heath, “Energy-efficient
tri-hybrid precoding with dynamic metasurface antennas,” in Proc.
Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst., Comput., 2023.
[144] J. Vieira et al., “A flexible 100-antenna testbed for massive MIMO,”
in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (Globecom), 2014.
[145] H. Asplund et al., Advanced antenna systems for 5G network deploy-
ments: Bridging the gap between theory and practice.
Academic
Press, 2020.
36
[146] G. Callebaut, L. Liu, T. Eriksson, L. Van der Perre, O. Edfors, and
C. Fager, “6G radio testbeds: Requirements, trends, and approaches,”
IEEE Microwave Magazine, 2024.
[147] A. Pereira et al., “Deployment strategies for large intelligent surfaces,”
IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 61 753–61 768, 2022.
[148] J. Alegría, F. Rusek, and O. Edfors, “Trade-offs in decentralized multi-
antenna architectures: The WAX decomposition,” IEEE Trans. Signal
Proc., vol. 69, pp. 3627–3641, 2021.
[149] J. Alegría and F. Rusek, “Trade-offs in decentralized multi-antenna
architectures: Sparse combining modules for WAX decomposition,”
IEEE Trans. Signal Proc. (to appear), vol. 71, 2023.
[150] Z. H. Shaik, E. Björnson, and E. G. Larsson, “MMSE-optimal sequen-
tial processing for cell-free massive MIMO with radio stripes,” IEEE
Trans. Commun., vol. 69, no. 11, pp. 7775–7789, 2021.
