Citation: Wang, J.; Chen, C.; Li, S.;
Wang, C.; Cao, X.; Yang, L.
Researching the CNN Collaborative
Inference Mechanism for
Heterogeneous Edge Devices. Sensors
2024, 24, 4176. https://doi.org/
10.3390/s24134176
Academic Editors: Mehdi Sookhak
and Francesco Moscato
Received: 17 May 2024
Revised: 23 June 2024
Accepted: 26 June 2024
Published: 27 June 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
sensors
Article
Researching the CNN Collaborative Inference Mechanism for
Heterogeneous Edge Devices
Jian Wang, Chong Chen
, Shiwei Li, Chaoyong Wang
, Xianzhi Cao and Liusong Yang *
College of Computer and Control Engineering, Northeast Forestry University, Harbin 150040, China;
wangj.icec@nefu.edu.cn (J.W.); cc235650@163.com (C.C.); 15666016740@163.com (S.L.);
wangchaoyong666@163.com (C.W.); cxz18525357537@163.com (X.C.)
* Correspondence: y_angliusong@nefu.edu.cn; Tel.: +86-18945657378
Abstract: Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have been widely applied in various edge com-
puting devices based on intelligent sensors. However, due to the high computational demands of
CNN tasks, the limited computing resources of edge intelligent terminal devices, and significant
architectural differences among these devices, it is challenging for edge devices to independently
execute inference tasks locally. Collaborative inference among edge terminal devices can effectively
utilize idle computing and storage resources and optimize latency characteristics, thus significantly
addressing the challenges posed by the computational intensity of CNNs. This paper targets efficient
collaborative execution of CNN inference tasks among heterogeneous and resource-constrained edge
terminal devices. We propose a pre-partitioning deployment method for CNNs based on critical
operator layers, and optimize the system bottleneck latency during pipeline parallelism using data
compression, queuing, and “micro-shifting” techniques. Experimental results demonstrate that our
method achieves significant acceleration in CNN inference within heterogeneous environments,
improving performance by 71.6% compared to existing popular frameworks.
Keywords: edge; heterogeneity; model partitioning; CNN inference; pipeline parallelism
1. Introduction
With the rapid development of cloud and edge computing, as well as the widespread
application of artificial intelligence, CNNs have been extensively utilized in intelligent
applications. In traditional cloud computing, most data are processed in the cloud [1], and
the resulting high latency, high bandwidth, and high computational-resource demands
urgently need to be addressed. Additionally, as artificial intelligence rapidly evolves, the
complexity of CNN inference tasks has exploded, and reliance on central clouds for CNN
inference faces unstable transmission links, excessive communication costs [2], and data
security and privacy issues [3]. The explosive growth in technologies such as 5G and
big data has spurred massive demand for smart edge terminal devices, driving industry
innovation and implementing intelligent edge architectures. To address the issues above,
edge computing paradigms like mobile edge computing and fog computing have emerged.
These paradigms can reduce network transmission latency, meet the intensive computing
needs at the network edge [4], and handle the complexity of CNN inference tasks locally.
By processing data locally at the source, edge computing helps enable real-time prediction,
enhanced scalability, and improved latency and privacy [5]. Due to the advantages of edge
computing in terms of latency, bandwidth, and security, it provides more effective technical
support for many applications that require real-time security [6].
Edge terminal devices are typically limited in computing power and storage, and
the neural network inference process is computation-intensive. Executing complex deep
learning models on a single resource-constrained edge terminal device can lead to longer
inference times. To overcome the limited computational resources of edge terminal de-
vices, neural-network acceleration techniques such as network pruning [7], parameter
Sensors 2024, 24, 4176. https://doi.org/10.3390/s24134176
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors
Sensors 2024, 24, 4176
2 of 15
quantization [8], and weight sharing [9] can increase neural-network computation speed.
However, these techniques are complex in practical applications, and excessively compress-
ing structurally complex CNN models to speed up inference could significantly degrade
model inference accuracy, while offloading models to edge servers can introduce latency,
bandwidth, and privacy issues.
Edge-to-edge collaboration, aggregating the computing resources of multiple edge
terminal devices to collaboratively execute CNN inference tasks, can effectively address
the aforementioned issues. However, the collaborative execution of inference tasks among
edge terminal devices still face several challenges. First, the complexity of CNN models,
with their numerous layers and parameters, requires substantial computational resources
and storage space for inference tasks. Deploying and executing these complex models on
edge devices can lead to performance issues. Second, the heterogeneity of edge devices
results in varying computational capabilities, storage capacities, and network bandwidths.
This means that the same task may have significantly different performance outcomes on
other devices, necessitating careful consideration of these differences to achieve optimal
performance and resource utilization. Furthermore, the dynamic nature of IoT systems
means that the state of devices and networks in edge computing environments may con-
stantly change, impacting task execution and the accuracy of results. In the context of
edge computing, there is an urgent need to fully utilize edge terminal devices for infer-
ence. This will enable edge detection-based applications and reduce over-reliance on the
cloud. This paper proposes a distributed deep-learning collaborative inference scheme to
complete CNN tasks with guaranteed accuracy by collaborating with edge heterogeneous
terminal devices.
The main contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:
While current model partitioning primarily focuses on device clusters within ho-
mogeneous architectures, this paper simulates the heterogeneity of IoT devices in edge
environments and proposes a CNN collaborative inference framework among heteroge-
neous device clusters. Based on the heterogeneous edge terminal devices, the pre-trained
model architecture is partitioned, and each edge terminal-device node loads the original
sub-model architecture and weight information to prevent loss of CNN inference accuracy.
A queuing mechanism and dual compression are introduced to construct a collab-
orative pipeline job among heterogeneous devices, reducing communication overhead
between devices, enhancing the utilization of edge computing resources, and increasing
the throughput of collaborative inference on heterogeneous edge devices.
The methods proposed in this paper are complementary to existing deep learning
frameworks and model compression techniques and can be integrated with other deep
learning frameworks and model compression techniques to further accelerate CNN inference.
2. Related Work
The literature [10] proposes an IoT-based intelligent solution for household cooking-oil
collection, highlighting the advantages of edge computing over cloud computing. Unlike
traditional cloud computing paradigms, this solution relies on edge node infrastructure
for data processing. Implementing CNN models on edge terminal devices involves layer
partitioning and deployment near the user to ensure fast execution. This is similar to our
proposed pre-partitioning deployment method based on key operational layers; however,
our Hecofer method further optimizes the data processing and transmission processes,
thereby reducing overall system latency. The literature [11] designed a local distributed com-
puting system that partitions a trained DNN (Deep Neural Network) model across multiple
mobile devices to accelerate inference. By reducing the computational cost and memory
usage of individual devices, it was the first to implement collaborative DNN inference tasks
across multiple IoT devices. This method has limitations in handling non-chain-structured
models in complex environments. The literature [12] proposed a deep reinforcement
learning-based distributed algorithm to optimize computational offloading with minimal
latency. The literature [13] proposes an optimization algorithm for offloading decisions and
Sensors 2024, 24, 4176
3 of 15
computational resource allocation. The algorithm is based on dual Q-Learning and aims to
reduce the maximum delay consumption between individual devices. The literature [14]
proposes a multi-user computation offloading and resource-allocation optimization model
to minimize the overall system latency. Although these methods have made progress
in optimizing latency, they seldom take into account the heterogeneity of devices. The
literature [15] presents a distributed dynamic task offloading algorithm based on deep
reinforcement learning to optimize the current workload of edge clients and edge nodes.
The literature [16] proposes using segment-based spatial partitioning to divide inference
tasks, using a layer-fusion parallelization method to empirically divide the CNN model
into four fused blocks, each with approximately the same number of layers. However, these
methods exhibit limitations when handling complex non-chain-structured models. The
literature [17], based on the availability of computational resources and current network
conditions, uses a fused convolutional-layer approach with spatial partitioning technology
to select the optimal degree of parallelism. The literature [18] used layer fusion, combined
with inference tasks, to dynamically adjust and achieve load balancing on heterogeneous
devices, balancing computational latency and communication latency. Our Hecofer method
more effectively achieves a balance between computation and communication through the
combined use of data compression and “micro-shifting” techniques, further optimizing
system performance. The literature [19] employed a novel progressive model-partitioning
algorithm to handle complex layer dependencies in non-chain structures, partitioning
model layers into independent execution units to create nearly new model partitions. Refer-
ence [20] proposes a method for neural-network collaborative computing using partitioned
multi-layer edge networks. The study establishes a time-delay optimization model to
identify the optimal partitioning scheme. These methods have achieved some success in
handling non-chain-structured models, but they present certain complexities in practical
deployment. The literature [21] adaptively implements vertically distributed inference
based on CNNs in a resource-constrained edge cluster. The literature [22] proposes CoopAI,
which distributes DNN inference to multiple edge end devices and allows them to preload
the necessary data to perform parallel computational inference without data exchange. The
literature [5] proposed an inter-device collaborative edge-computing framework, using
weight pruning to deploy models to edge terminal devices. The literature [23] introduced a
distributed framework for edge systems, Edge Pipe, using pipeline parallelism to accelerate
inference, facilitating the operation of larger models. Given the limitations in computational
resources and storage of edge terminal devices, existing mechanisms usually assume a
chained model structure; however, modern deep-learning models are more complex, often
involving non-chain structures. Reference [24] introduces AutoDiCE, a system designed to
partition CNN models into a set of sub-models that are collaboratively deployed across
multiple edge devices. This approach enhances overall system throughput by optimizing
model partitioning and deployment strategies. AutoDiCE offers improvements for both
chain-structured and non-chain-structured models, but it does not fully consider the vari-
ability in the computational capabilities of devices in edge environments. The literature [25]
explores pruning models and task partitioning between edge terminal devices and servers
to better adapt to system environments and edge server capabilities, maximizing collab-
orative inference across edge devices. However, model pruning methods will inevitably
reduce the accuracy of model inference. The literature [26] designs a feature compression
module based on channel attention in CNN, which selects the most important features to
compress intermediate data, thereby accelerating device-edge collaborative CNN inference.
3. System Model and Problem Formulation
The definitions of important symbols in this usage section are summarized in Table 1.
Sensors 2024, 24, 4176
4 of 15
Table 1. List of notations.
Notation
Description
m
CNN Inference Task
L
Number of layers in the CNN model
N
Number of heterogeneous devices at the edge
devi
The i-th edge collaborative device
devs
The main edge device
R
Number of CNN sub-models
Tcomp
Computational delay
Tcomm
Transmission delay
Ttotal
Total latency of the reasoning task
Tdevi
↕
The comm(comp, get, total) latency of the
device devi
r
CNN submodel
c
CNN inference tasks
3.1. System Model
To address the challenges faced in edge computing scenarios, where computational
and storage resources are limited, making it difficult for a single edge terminal device to
efficiently execute computationally intensive inference tasks, we propose a collaborative
inference method tailored for heterogeneous edge terminal devices. The overall architecture
is shown in Figure 1, which illustrates the edge-to-edge collaborative inference scheme.
 
1
dev
2
dev
3
dev
i
dev
s
dev
Result
Complete CNN  
Partial CNN
Illustration of Heterogeneous device-device 
collaborative CNN inference
Figure 1. Device-device collaborative CNN-inference execution framework.
In Figure 1, devi is the edge node device and devs is the main node device. The master
node device devs replaces the traditional cloud server, reducing the distance between
devices and the server. For a CNN inference task m, such as object detection, m is composed
of L layers, each of which can be considered a sub-model. Given the number of available
edge terminal devices N, the CNN is partitioned by the devs into R sub-models (R ≤L), and
each sub-model r is assigned to an edge terminal device devi for execution. During micro-
batch inference, the edge main node devs receives data from the user end and transmits
it to the next target node devi. Since the selected device is responsible only for a portion
of the original model’s inference, each edge terminal device node devi must transmit the
Sensors 2024, 24, 4176
5 of 15
intermediate output data to the next target device node devi+1, until the CNN inference
task is completed. The final-stage node device then transfers the result back to the main
node device devs.
3.2. Time Prediction Model
As illustrated in Figure 2, we tested the inference latency of ResNet50 under 15 different
resource conditions (number of cores, memory). The latency of executing inference tasks
significantly decreases as device resources increase, indicating that device capability dispar-
ities significantly affect the inference latency of CNN tasks. Our experiments suggest that
CNN partitioning should consider the heterogeneous capabilities between devices to fully
utilize the computational resources of edge terminal devices to minimize inference latency.
Figure 2. ResNet50 inference latency under different resource models.
As the device performs CNN inference, the computation is primarily concentrated
in the model’s convolutional and fully connected layers. And the computation time for
convolutional and fully connected layers correlates with the number of floating-point oper-
ations per second (FLOPs). By calculating FLOPs, we can estimate the computation time
for the model’s convolutional and fully connected layers, providing a basis for the initial
partitioning of the CNN model. The literature [27] provides the formulas for calculating
FLOPs for convolutional and fully connected layers, as shown in Formulas (1) and (2),
where H and W represent the height and width of the feature map; Cin and Cout represent
the number of input and output channels for the convolution; K represents the size of the
convolutional kernel; and I and O represent the input and output dimensions for the fully
connected layer.
FFLOPs = 2HW

CinK2 + 1

Cout
(1)
FFLOPs = (2I −1)O
(2)
The estimated model for calculating time based on FLOPs is shown in Formulas (3)–(5),
where x represents FLOPs; kdevi represents the computational capability of the device; y
represents the computational time of the device; and b is the inherent time overhead.
Multiple computations of convolution and fully connected operations are performed
and averaged across edge device nodes, utilizing varied input-feature map dimensions
(H × W), input and output channel numbers (Cin, Cout), and input and output sizes (I, O).
Multiple sets of FLOPs and computation times are recorded, and estimated models are
obtained using the least squares method to gauge the relative computational power of
heterogeneous devices.
ydevi = kdevix + b
(3)
Sensors 2024, 24, 4176
6 of 15
kdevi = n∑n
i=1 xiyi−∑n
i=1 xi∑n
i=1 yi
n∑n
i=1 x2
i −(∑n
i=1 xi)2
(4)
b = ydevi −kdevix
(5)
In device-to-device collaborative inference, the transmission overhead of intermediate
data remains a non-negligible factor. As shown in Figure 3, we simulate the edge terminal-
device computing environment in an existing low-bandwidth experimental environment,
using VGG16 as an example, to statistically analyze the size and transmission delay of
model layer outputs. In Figure 3, the transmission delay of model layer outputs shows a
high positive correlation with the data volume of layer outputs.
Figure 3. VGG16 output data size and transmission delay of each layer.
The experimental results indicate that in bandwidth-constrained harsh environments,
CNN partitioning should consider the size of model-layer output data to mitigate the impact
of transmission latency on system throughput, particularly by avoiding intermediate layers
with large output data.
Furthermore, to further reduce the data transmission volume between devices devi
and devi+1 in device collaborative inference, we employ a data compression algorithm to
reduce communication demands. Thus, during device-to-device collaborative inference,
the total delay Tdevi
total for a single node device devi mainly consists of three parts:
The data acquisition latency Tget;
The computation latency Tcomp of edge device devi;
The transmission latency Tcomm to the next edge device devi+1.
Since the time for compression and decompression is usually negligible, it is often
disregarded.
Tdevi
total = Tdevi
comp + Tdevi
comm + Tdevi
get
(6)
where the size of Tdevi
get depends on the overall delay T
devj
total of the previous device devj. In
addition, in the micro-batch inference process, if the total inference delay of the current
device is less than the total inference delay of its target node device, the current device can
send intermediate data into the queue of the target device ahead of time after completing
the inference task, for the target device to continue to complete the inference task, saving
the target device’s wait for acquisition time. Therefore, when Equation (7) is satisfied,
Equation (6) can be simplified to Equation (8).
Tdevj
total < Tdevi
total (0 < j < i)
(7)
Sensors 2024, 24, 4176
7 of 15
Tdevi
total = Tdevi
comp + Tdevi
comm
(8)
This means that minimizing the overall delay on device devi translates to minimizing
the computation and communication delays.
3.3. Pipeline Model
The advantage of multi-device collaborative inference is to reduce the computational
load on a single device and lower the inference delay of the task. However, when reducing
the computational delay Tcomp, the transmission of intermediate data from device devi to
devi+1 introduces an inter-device communication transmission delay Tcomm. Therefore, it is
necessary to design a collaborative inference mechanism among multiple edge terminal
devices, appropriately partitioning and distributing CNN inference tasks to effectively
balance the computational delay Tcomp and communication delay Tcomm, to minimize the
overall delay Ttotal of the CNN inference task.
After partitioning and deploying the model, each edge device is responsible for
completing a portion of the original model’s inference. To achieve efficient collaborative
inference at the edge and shorten the inference time of tasks, we introduce pipeline pro-
cessing. As shown in Figure 4, edge terminal devices can independently perform inference
on their partitioned sections.
 
1
dev
2
dev
3
dev
4
dev
0.2419s
0.4758s
0.3376s
0.2513s
Total Execution Latency of 100 Frames: 486.714s
Figure 4. Schematic diagram of pipeline model processing.
Specifically, for a sequence of continuous inference tasks c, edge device devi first
completes the first inference task and transmits the intermediate data to devi+1, which then
continues to execute the first inference task. At this moment, devi+1 is executing the first
inference task. When the second inference task arrives, device devi immediately begins
executing the second inference task. Devices are capable of concurrently processing tasks
at different stages, thus reducing idle time. Thus, when multiple continuous inference
tasks are input, devices efficiently execute inference tasks in a pipeline parallel manner.
Unfortunately, our experiments have verified that the device with the longest execution
time becomes the bottleneck in device-to-device collaborative inference.
This paper partitioned the VGG19 model into four parts, each deployed on four
different edge heterogeneous devices for collaborative execution of target classification
tasks. The time taken by each device to complete one round of inference was, respectively,
0.2419 s, 0.4758 s, 0.3376 s, and 0.2513 s. The total time for 1000 rounds of inference was
486.714 s, approximately 1000 times the execution time of the longest device. Therefore, to
fully utilize the computational resources of device-to-device systems and improve system
throughput, it is necessary to minimize the bottleneck delay in the system.
4. CNN Model-Partitioning Deployment and Optimization Methods
4.1. CNN Model-Partitioning Deployment and Optimization Methods
In the context of model partitioning, this paper introduces a pre-partitioning method
called Hecofer, specifically designed for CNN inference models and targeting key operator
Sensors 2024, 24, 4176
8 of 15
layers. Formulas (1) and (2) provide the computation methods for FLOPs in convolutional
and fully connected layers. Layer communication delays are estimated based on the size of
each layer’s output data combined with communication bandwidth. The computational
capacities of heterogeneous edge terminal devices are quantified using benchmark tests
and Formulas (3) and (5). The computational capabilities of heterogeneous edge terminal
devices are normalized to homogenize them. Hecofer uses a parameterized performance-
prediction model for multiple types of CNN layers and heterogeneous edge terminal
devices, identifying key operator layers for model partitioning under heterogeneous com-
putational power.
Traditional model partitioning typically assumes that the model exists in a chain
structure, where each layer strictly depends on the output of the previous layer. How-
ever, actual model computation graphs may have multiple parallel paths, with one layer
possibly depending on several previous layers, which increases the complexity of model
partitioning. Hecofer addresses this issue by supporting not only linear structures but
also non-linear structures. The model-partitioning approach is primarily based on the
topological structure of a directed acyclic graph (DAG). It partitions the DAG struc-
ture of the CNN model into key operator nodes, traverses the pre-partition nodes of
the initial model, and identifies the starting and ending points for partitioning to con-
struct the partitioned sub-model. The specific division method is shown in Algorithm 1:
Algorithm 1: Model Partitioning
1. Input:
model: original model
layer_partitions: List of pre-partitioned model layer names
2. Output:
split_models: List of sub-models after partition
3. Initialize an empty model list: models = []
4.
for p = 0 to (len(layer_partitions) + 1) do
5.
if p == 0 then
6.
Save layer_partitions[p] to start
7.
else
8.
Save layer_partitions[p −1] to start
9.
end if
10.
if p == len(layer_partitions) then
11.
Set end to model output
12.
Print model.output
13.
else
14.
Set end to layer_partitions[p]
15.
end if
16.
Construct submodel part ←construct_model(model,start,end,part_name)
17.
split_models ←part
18.
return split_models
19.
end for
Algorithm 2 introduces the deployment process for sub-models based on key operator
layers. In the initial phase, the edge terminal device devi acts as a server, autonomously
waiting for a connection from the main device devs. Initially, devs establishes a socket to
transmit the model’s weights and structural information to devi. Once the connection is
established, edge terminal device devs creates sockets for model weights and architecture,
transmitting sub-model information to devi. Edge terminal device devi loads model ar-
chitecture and weight information from devs, instantiating a sub-model with the correct
architecture and weights. During the socket information parsing, devi also acquires the
routing information of the next edge terminal device node devi+1 in the inference chain.
This allows devi to forward the intermediate inference results to the next device node
devi+1. For the last device node in the inference chain, the routing information of its next
node points to the main device devs, ensuring that devs can correctly receive the final
Sensors 2024, 24, 4176
9 of 15
inference results after initiating the inference task. Through this process, the partitioned
deployment and inference tasks of the entire CNN model are efficiently executed across
multiple edge terminal devices, ensuring scalability and flexibility in model deployment.
Algorithm 2: Hecofer Deployment
1. Input:
split_models: List of sub-models after segmentation
deviIPs: List of IP addresses of edge heterogeneous devices
2. Output:
None (implementation model deployment)
3. for i = 0 to len(split_models) −1 do
4.
Set weights_sock to non-blocking mode
5.
Set the weights_sock timeout period
6.
model_json ←split_models[i]
7.
weights_sock.connect ←(deviIPs[i], port)
8.
if i != len(split_models) −1 then
9.
nextdevi = deviIPs[i + 1]
10.
else
11.
nextdevi = devisIP
12.
end if
13.
Send weights: send_weights(split_models[i].get_weights(),
weights_sock, chunk_size)
14.
Set model_sock to non-blocking mode
15.
Set the model_sock timeout period
16.
model_sock.connect ←(deviIPs[i], port)
17.
Send nextdeviIP to deviIPs[i]
18.
Monitor the model_socket waiting for acknowledgement
19.
end for
4.2. Hecofer Optimization Algorithm
Partitioning the CNN model DAG structure based on key operator layers reduces
the complexity of searching for the optimal model-partitioning strategy. However, the
efficiency of collaborative inference under this method still needs improvement. To enhance
the overall performance of collaborative inference among heterogeneous edge terminal
devices, this paper designs the Hecofer optimization algorithm.
In the device-to-device collaborative paradigm, edge terminal devices only need to
load smaller sub-models, are closer to the data source, and have shorter physical trans-
mission distances, theoretically resulting in smaller communication delays. However, as
participating devices need to communicate, this introduces communication time between
devices. Formula (8) indicates that under the edge-collaboration paradigm, the execution
delay of device devi is determined by both Tdevi
comp and Tdevi
comm. Typically, when multiple
devices perform collaborative inference, data compression helps reduce data volume and
enhance transmission efficiency due to network and resource limitations. For instance, a
data volume of 0.57 MB is compressed to 0.28 MB during transmission in a collaborative
inference task involving ResNet50 across three heterogeneous edge devices, achieving a
compression rate of approximately 49%.
Our experiments confirm that the device with the longest execution time becomes the
bottleneck in device-to-device collaborative inference. To balance Tdevi
total across heteroge-
neous devices, this paper proposes a “micro-shifting” algorithm based on extremities. After
partitioning based on key operator layers, a “micro-shift” adjustment is made for the edge
terminal-device node that takes the longest in pipeline operations, reducing the “short-
board effect” during pipeline parallelism. The edge main device devs, in each operation,
performs a forward layer-offloading task for the device node with the longest execution
time, thereby shortening its execution delay. The offloaded layer is moved to an adjacent de-
Sensors 2024, 24, 4176
10 of 15
vice node with a shorter execution time, minimizing execution time discrepancies between
devices.
Ideally, the execution delays of all edge terminal-device nodes would be identical.
Even though “micro-shifting” adjustments can somewhat reduce the bottlenecks in pipeline
parallelism, the Tdevi
total of devices remains unequal. To address the idle time caused by
devices waiting for output data from preceding devices, the Hecofer optimization method
introduces a queue mechanism. As an example, the VGG19 model is divided into four
parts and deployed across four different edge devices. The time required for each device
to complete one inference cycle is 0.2419 s, 0.4758 s, 0.3376 s, and 0.2513 s, respectively. In
this scenario, the edge master device performs layer offloading from the second device to
reduce its execution delay. The offloaded layers are transferred to the first device, balancing
the execution time.
The queue mechanism allows devices to preemptively receive and store subsequent
inference requests while executing the current task, facilitating continuous processing,
reducing wait times, and enhancing the overall system throughput. Specifically, each edge
device is integrated with a queue for storing multiple inference requests. Once a device
completes the current task, it transmits the intermediate results to the next target device
and retrieves the next task from the queue for processing. This mechanism prevents devices
from waiting for the current task to be completed before receiving new tasks, thereby
achieving more efficient inference processing.
5. Numerical Results
This section demonstrates the performance of the proposed algorithm. It first describes
the experimental setup of this study. Then, the evaluation results are analyzed from
different perspectives. Finally, the proposed Hecofer method is compared with the local
benchmark inference and existing popular methods, evaluating the performance in terms
of latency, throughput, and speedup ratio.
5.1. Experimental Environment
Hecofer is implemented using the deep-learning framework TensorFlow. The exper-
iments were conducted using two PCs, one with an Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-12700H (Intel
Corporation, Santa Clara, CA, USA) 2.3 GHz with 16 GB RAM and the other with an
Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-9700 CPU (Intel Corporation, Santa Clara, CA, USA) H 3.0 GHz with
12 GB RAM. We virtualized 4 Ubuntu 18.04 and 4 Ubuntu 22.04 systems, simulating a
collaborative computing environment among eight heterogeneous device terminals under
a 100 Mbps bandwidth by assigning different numbers of processor cores and RAM to each
virtual machine.
5.2. Experimental Dataset and Network Model
Table 2 provides details of several common CNN network models, including the
number of parameters, model size, and GFLOPs data for each model. The network models
used in this study are the chain-structured VGG16 and VGG19, as well as the non-chain-
structured ResNet50.
Table 2. Popular DNN models.
Method
Type
Parameters
Model Size (MB)
GFLOPS
AlexNet
CNN
60,965,224
233
0.7
VGG-16
CNN
138,357,544
528
15.5
VGG-19
CNN
143,667,240
548
19.6
ResNet50
CNN
25,610,269
98
3.9
ResNetl01
CNN
44,654,608
170
7.6
ResNetl52
CNN
60,344,387
230
11.3
Sensors 2024, 24, 4176
11 of 15
5.3. Evaluation Metrics
This section outlines key evaluation metrics for assessing the performance of the
Hecofer method, including total inference latency, inference throughput, and inference
speedup:
Total Inference Latency: this encompasses the total time from initiating CNN inference
to transmitting the results from the edge terminal device to the main edge device.
Inference Throughput: The system defines a fixed time window during which it
records the number of inference cycles completed. This count is then converted into the
number of inferences per unit time.
Inference Speedup Ratio: S is defined as the ratio between the total inference time
Tlocal for local inference and THeco f er for the method proposed in this paper.
S =
THeco f er −Tlocal
Tlocal
× 100%
(9)
6. Experimental Results and Analysis
Figure 5 illustrates the performance evaluation of the Hecofer method using varying
numbers of edge devices. The scenario with a single device represents the baseline inference
latency, while systems involving two to seven devices demonstrate the total inference
latency during collaborative inference across multiple heterogeneous devices.
Figure 5. Total inference delay under different number of devices.
For VGG16 and VGG19 models, collaborative inference with seven devices achieves
optimal performance. However, the benefits of multi-device collaboration in inference
are limited. Taking ResNet50 as an example, when the number of devices increases to six,
the overall time cost starts to exceed the benefits of pipeline parallelism. This is because
increasing the number of collaborating devices can reduce the computational latency per
device but also introduce significant network overhead. In ResNet50, particularly with
sic devices involved, the cost of transmitting intermediate data outweighs the benefits of
parallel computation.
Figure 6 illustrates a comparison between model-layer partitioning and the Hecofer
partitioning method under different levels of device collaboration. The analysis covers the
impact of these two partitioning approaches on the overall inference latency when using
two, three, and four devices for collaborative inference. Each bar in the figure represents
the total inference latency of the respective model across varying numbers of devices.
The bars corresponding to the Hecofer method depict lower latency levels, indicating
its performance advantage in heterogeneous device environments with identical device
configurations.
Sensors 2024, 24, 4176
12 of 15
Figure 6. Comparison between Hecofer and equal-layer partitioning.
Figure 7 illustrates the improvement in system model throughput with varying num-
bers of edge terminal devices participating in collaborative inference. As the number
of collaborative devices increases, the throughput of the VGG16, VGG19, and ResNet50
models surpasses the baseline performance. However, Figure 7 also reveals the impact of
network overhead on inference throughput.
Sensors 2024, 24, 4176
13 of 15
 
Figure 7. Model throughput under different number of devices.
Specifically, each point in Figure 7 represents the inference throughput with different
numbers of devices participating in collaborative inference. It can be observed that when
the number of devices increases from one to four, the throughput of all models improves
significantly. However, when the number of devices further increases to five and beyond,
particularly for the ResNet50 model, the throughput starts to decline. This indicates that
while increasing the number of devices initially enhances system performance, the network
overhead eventually surpasses the computational benefits, becoming a bottleneck for
system performance.
To validate the advancement of the proposed method, a comparison is made with the
method from the literature [28], which uses CORE for simulations with near-zero latency
in a local environment. Assuming that Hecofer’s communication latency is negligible, we
use the bottleneck delay per round as the actual round inference delay for this analysis.
Figure 8 simulates the inference speedup ratio under near-zero latency conditions with
different numbers of devices. As the number of device nodes increases, the single-round in-
ference latency gradually decreases, and the inference speedup ratio continuously increases.
In a four-device setup using a chain-structured model, VGG19’s inference throughput
shows a 40% improvement compared to DSE [24]. With seven devices, ResNet50 achieves
an inference gain of up to 124.6%, significantly higher than 53% under DEFER [28]. VGG19
and VGG16 reach gains of 170% and 176.8%, respectively. This also highlights Hecofer’s
significant advantage for computation-intensive models like VGG19.
Figure 8. Inference acceleration ratio under different numbers of devices.
Sensors 2024, 24, 4176
14 of 15
These results demonstrate the high versatility and flexibility of the proposed Hecofer
model partition-deployment method. It significantly benefits both chain-structured and
non-chain-structured models when tailored for collaborative inference across heteroge-
neous devices.
7. Conclusions
This study investigates the partitioned deployment mechanism of CNN models for
heterogeneous edge terminal devices and proposes a pre-partitioned deployment method
based on critical operation layers called Hecofer, aiming to minimize the overall system
latency. Specifically, the Hecofer method identifies and leverages the essential layers of
operation within CNN models to pre-partition and deploy the models, significantly reduc-
ing inference latency and increasing system throughput across multiple heterogeneous
devices. Compared to local benchmark schemes, the Hecofer method significantly reduces
the inference latency and increases the throughput for both chain-structured models (e.g.,
VGG16, VGG19) and non-chain-structured models (e.g., ResNet50). When compared to
traditional equal-layer partitioning methods, Hecofer demonstrates significant advantages
in multi-heterogeneous device-deployment environments. Additionally, compared to the
technique presented in the literature [24,28], our proposed model partitioning-deployment
method substantially enhances system throughput.
It is noteworthy that our research differs from methods such as model compression
and knowledge distillation. Model compression reduces computational costs by decreasing
the number of parameters, while knowledge distillation trains lightweight models to
approximate the performance of the original models. In the future, these techniques could
potentially be combined with the Hecofer method to further accelerate CNN inference
speed on edge terminal devices through multi-device collaboration.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, J.W. and C.C.; methodology, S.L. and C.W.; software,
L.Y. and X.C.; validation, J.W., C.C. and L.Y.; formal analysis, C.C., S.L. and C.W.; investigation,
X.C.; resources, J.W. and L.Y.; data curation, S.L. and X.C.; writing—original draft preparation, C.C.;
writing—review and editing, C.C., J.W. and L.Y.; visualization, X.C., C.W. and C.C. All authors have
read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work was funded by the Special Fund for Forestry Scientific Research in the Public
Interest (201104037).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in
the study.
Data Availability Statement: Dataset available on request from the authors.
Acknowledgments: We thank Jian Wang and Liusong Yang for excellent technical assistance.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest. All authors have read and agreed to
the published version of the manuscript.
References
1.
Li, W.; Jin, S. Performance evaluation and optimization of a task offloading strategy on the mobile edge computing with edge
heterogeneity. J. Supercomput. 2021, 77, 12486–12507. [CrossRef]
2.
Ren, W.; Qu, Y.; Dong, C.; Jing, Y.; Sun, H.; Wu, Q.; Guo, S. A Survey on Collaborative DNN Inference for Edge Intelligence. arXiv
2022, arXiv:2207.07812. [CrossRef]
3.
Ryan, M.D. Cloud computing privacy concerns on our doorstep. Commun. ACM 2011, 54, 36–38. [CrossRef]
4.
Cai, Q.; Zhou, Y.; Liu, L.; Qi, Y.; Pan, Z.; Zhang, H. Collaboration of heterogeneous edge computing paradigms: How to fill the
gap between theory and practice. IEEE Wirel. Commun. 2023, 31, 110–117. [CrossRef]
5.
Naveen, S.; Kounte, M.R.; Ahmed, M.R. Low latency deep learning inference model for distributed intelligent IoT edge clusters.
IEEE Access 2021, 9, 160607–160621. [CrossRef]
6.
Han, P.; Zhuang, X.; Zuo, H.; Lou, P.; Chen, X. The Lightweight Anchor Dynamic Assignment Algorithm for Object Detection.
Sensors 2023, 23, 6306. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Sensors 2024, 24, 4176
15 of 15
7.
Manessi, F.; Rozza, A.; Bianco, S.; Napoletano, P.; Schettini, R. Automated pruning for deep neural network compression.
In Proceedings of the 2018 24th International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR), Beijing, China, 20–24 August 2018;
pp. 657–664.
8.
Wu, J.; Leng, C.; Wang, Y.; Hu, Q.; Cheng, J. Quantized convolutional neural networks for mobile devices. In Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Las Vegas, NV, USA, 27–30 June 2016; pp. 4820–4828.
9.
Al-Quraan, M.; Mohjazi, L.; Bariah, L.; Centeno, A.; Zoha, A.; Arshad, K.; Assaleh, K.; Muhaidat, S.; Debbah, M.; Imran, M.A.
Edge-native intelligence for 6G communications driven by federated learning: A survey of trends and challenges. IEEE Trans.
Emerg. Top. Comput. Intell. 2023, 7, 957–979. [CrossRef]
10.
Gomes, B.; Soares, C.; Torres, J.M.; Karmali, K.; Karmali, S.; Moreira, R.S.; Sobral, P. An Efficient Edge Computing-Enabled
Network for Used Cooking Oil Collection. Sensors 2024, 24, 2236. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11.
Mao, J.; Chen, X.; Nixon, K.W.; Krieger, C.; Chen, Y. Modnn: Local distributed mobile computing system for deep neural
network. In Proceedings of the Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE), Lausanne, Switzerland,
27–31 March 2017; pp. 1396–1401.
12.
Zhang, S.; Zhang, S.; Qian, Z.; Wu, J.; Jin, Y.; Lu, S. Deepslicing: Collaborative and adaptive cnn inference with low latency. IEEE
Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst. 2021, 32, 2175–2187. [CrossRef]
13.
Hu, B.; Gao, Y.; Zhang, W.; Jia, D.; Liu, H. Computation Offloading and Resource Allocation in IoT-Based Mobile Edge Computing
Systems. In Proceedings of the 2023 IEEE International Conference on Smart Internet of Things (SmartIoT), Xining, China,
25–27 August 2023; pp. 119–123.
14.
Chai, Z.; Hou, H.; Li, Y. A dynamic queuing model based distributed task offloading algorithm using deep reinforcement learning
in mobile edge computing. Appl. Intell. 2023, 53, 28832–28847. [CrossRef]
15.
Liu, X.; Zheng, J.; Zhang, M.; Li, Y.; Wang, R.; He, Y. Multi-User Computation Offloading and Resource Allocation Algorithm in a
Vehicular Edge Network. Sensors 2024, 24, 2205. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.
Zhou, L.; Samavatian, M.H.; Bacha, A.; Majumdar, S.; Teodorescu, R. Adaptive parallel execution of deep neural networks
on heterogeneous edge devices. In Proceedings of the 4th ACM/IEEE Symposium on Edge Computing, Arlington, VA, USA,
7–9 November 2019; pp. 195–208.
17.
Zhao, Z.; Barijough, K.M.; Gerstlauer, A. Deepthings: Distributed adaptive deep learning inference on resource-constrained iot
edge clusters. IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Des. Integr. Circuits Syst. 2018, 37, 2348–2359. [CrossRef]
18.
Zhang, X.; Wang, Y. DeepMECagent: Multi-agent computing resource allocation for UAV-assisted mobile edge computing in
distributed IoT system. Appl. Intell. 2023, 53, 1180–1191. [CrossRef]
19.
Hu, Y.; Imes, C.; Zhao, X.; Kundu, S.; Beerel, P.A.; Crago, S.P.; Walters, J.P.N. Pipeline parallelism for inference on heterogeneous
edge computing. arXiv 2021, arXiv:2110.14895.
20.
Hu, C.; Li, B. Distributed inference with deep learning models across heterogeneous edge devices. In Proceedings of the IEEE
INFOCOM 2022-IEEE Conference on Computer Communications, Virtual Conference, 2–5 May 2022; pp. 330–339.
21.
Zeng, L.; Chen, X.; Zhou, Z.; Yang, L.; Zhang, J. Coedge: Cooperative dnn inference with adaptive workload partitioning over
heterogeneous edge devices. IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. 2020, 29, 595–608. [CrossRef]
22.
Yang, C.-Y.; Kuo, J.-J.; Sheu, J.-P.; Zheng, K.-J. Cooperative distributed deep neural network deployment with edge computing. In
Proceedings of the ICC 2021-IEEE International Conference on Communications, Virtual Event, 14–23 June 2021; pp. 1–6.
23.
Li, Q.; Zhou, M.-T.; Ren, T.-F.; Jiang, C.-B.; Chen, Y. Partitioning multi-layer edge network for neural network collaborative
computing. EURASIP J. Wirel. Commun. Netw. 2023, 2023, 80. [CrossRef]
24.
Guo, X.; Pimentel, A.D.; Stefanov, T. AutoDiCE: Fully Automated Distributed CNN Inference at the Edge.
arXiv 2022,
arXiv:2207.12113.
25.
Shan, N.; Ye, Z.; Cui, X. Collaborative intelligence: Accelerating deep neural network inference via device-edge synergy. Secur.
Commun. Netw. 2020, 2020, 8831341. [CrossRef]
26.
Li, N.; Iosifidis, A.; Zhang, Q. Attention-based feature compression for cnn inference offloading in edge computing. In Proceedings
of the ICC 2023-IEEE International Conference on Communications, Rome, Italy, 28 May–1 June 2023; pp. 967–972.
27.
Molchanov, P.; Tyree, S.; Karras, T.; Aila, T.; Kautz, J. Pruning convolutional neural networks for resource efficient inference. arXiv
2016, arXiv:1611.06440.
28.
Parthasarathy, A.; Krishnamachari, B. Defer: Distributed edge inference for deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the 2022 14th
International Conference on COMmunication Systems & NETworkS (COMSNETS), Bangalore, India, 4–8 June 2022; pp. 749–753.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
