JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
1
Coalition Formation for Heterogeneous Federated
Learning Enabled Channel Estimation in
RIS-assisted Cell-free MIMO
Nan Qi, Senior Member, IEEE, Haoxuan Liu, Member, IEEE, Theodoros A. Tsiftsis, Senior Member, IEEE,
Alexandros-Apostolos A. Boulogeorgos, Senior Member, IEEE, Fuhui Zhou, Senior Member, IEEE, Shi Jin,
Fellow, IEEE, Qihui Wu, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Downlink channel estimation remains a significant
bottleneck in reconfigurable intelligent surface-assisted cell-free
multiple-input multiple-output communication systems. Conven-
tional approaches primarily rely on centralized deep learning
methods to estimate the high-dimensional and complex cas-
caded channels. These methods require data aggregation from
all users for centralized model training, leading to excessive
communication overhead and significant data privacy concerns.
Additionally, the large size of local learning models imposes
heavy computational demands on end users, necessitating strong
computational capabilities that most commercial devices lack.
To address the aforementioned challenges, a coalition-formation-
guided heterogeneous federated learning (FL) framework is
proposed. This framework leverages coalition formation to guide
the formation of heterogeneous FL user groups for efficient
channel estimation. Specifically, by utilizing a distributed deep
reinforcement learning (DRL) approach, each FL user intel-
ligently and independently decides whether to join or leave
a coalition, aiming at improving channel estimation accuracy,
while reducing local model size and computational costs for
end users. Moreover, to accelerate the DRL-FL convergence
process and reduce computational burdens on end users, a
transfer learning method is introduced. This method incorporates
both received reference signal power and distance similarity
metrics, by considering that nodes with similar distances to
the base station and comparable received signal power have a
strong likelihood of experiencing similar channel fading. Massive
experiments performed that reveal that, compared with the
benchmarks, the proposed framework significantly reduces the
computational overhead of end users by 16%, improves data
privacy, and improves channel estimation accuracy by 20%.
Index Terms—Coalition formation, reconfigurable intelligent
surface, multiple-input multiple-output, channel estimation, het-
This article was accepted in part at the IEEE Wireless Communications
and Networking Conference(WCNC), Milan, Italy, March 24–27, 2025 [1].
Nan
Qi,
Haoxuan
Liu,
Fuhui
Zhou,
and
Qihui
Wu
are
with
the
Key
Laboratory
of
Dynamic
Cognitive
System
of
Electromag-
netic Spectrum Space, Ministry of Industry and Information Technol-
ogy, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China,
210016. E-mail: nanqi.commun@gmail.com, nuaalhx@nuaa.edu.cn, zhou-
fuhui@ieee.org, wuqihui@nuaa.edu.cn.
Theodoros A. Tsiftsis is with the Department of Informatics and Telecom-
munications, University of Thessaly, 35100 Lamia, Greece, E-mail: tsift-
sis@uth.gr.
Alexandros -Apostolos. A. Boulogeorgos is with the Department of Elec-
trical and Computer Engineering, University of Western Macedonia, 50100
Kozani, Greece, E-mail: aboulogeorgos@uowm.gr.
S. Jin is with the National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory
and Frontiers Science Center for Mobile Information Communication and
Security, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, P.R. China, E-mail: jin-
shi@seu.edu.cn.
erogeneous federated learning (FL), transfer learning, distributed
deep reinforcement learning.
I. INTRODUCTION
Over the past decades, wireless technologies have been
substantially evolving to meet the challenges of ultra-high
capacity, ultra-low latency, and massive device access brought
about by fifth-generation (5G) networks and beyond. One of
the most powerful technologies is multiple-input multiple-
output (MIMO) [2]–[4]. MIMO networks, comprised of mul-
tiple multi-antenna base stations (BSs) serving multiple users
within a designated area, now play a pivotal role in enhancing
spectral efficiency and network capacity. However, as the
number of mobile communication users surges suddenly, the
communication rate of individual users (especially the edge
users) will be forced to decrease. To enhance system spectral
efficiency and quality of service of edge users, a cell-free
MIMO network architecture has recently been proposed [5].
In this scheme, all BSs are connected to a central processing
unit (CPU), which operates them as a unified MIMO network
without cell boundaries. This enables coherent transmission
and reception, allowing the BSs to serve all users over the
same time-frequency resources by applying spatial multiplex-
ing techniques [6].
Meanwhile, reconfigurable intelligent surface/intelligent re-
flection surfaces (RISs / IRSs) have attracted extensive atten-
tion in both academia and industry. RISs can manipulate elec-
tromagnetic parameters like phase, amplitude, frequency, and
polarization [7] to create a favorable wireless communication
environment, which is considered to be a key technology in
the sixth generation (6G) [8]. Researchers have investigated
the fundamental constraints and system architecture, revealing
that RIS-assisted cell-free MIMO can greatly increase user
communication rates [9], [10].
Several studies highlight the significance of RIS in wire-
less networks optimize wireless network performance by si-
multaneously optimizing the passive beamforming and BS
transmit beamforming [11]–[15]. In particular, the authors in
[11] optimized beamforming by weighted minimize mean-
square error (WMMSE) maximizing a wireless network user’s
weighted sum rate (WSR), and the complexity of the algo-
rithm is greatly reduced by deriving closed-form solutions.
Furthermore, to optimize the minimum possible rate for cell-
free MIMO networks supported by numerous RISs, [12] and
arXiv:2502.05538v1  [cs.IT]  8 Feb 2025
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
2
TABLE I: A comparison with existing literature
[16]–[20]
[21], [22]
[23]–[25]
[26], [27]
[28], [29]
[30]
[31]–[33]
Our work
Cascaded channel
✓
✓
✓
✕
✕
✓
✕
✓
Distributed training
✕
✓
✓
✓
✓
✕
✕
✓
Coalition formation game
✕
✕
✕
✕
✓
✓
✓
✓
Distributed intelligent decision-making
✕
✕
✕
✕
✕
✓
✓
✓
Heterogeneous training model
✕
✕
✕
✓
✕
✕
✕
✓
[13] have focused on the fairness problem. The authors of [14]
and [15] have optimized the energy efficiency of RIS-assisted
networks through network deployment as well as beamform-
ing. Nevertheless, prior research is primarily available on the
assumption that perfect channel information exists. In massive
MIMO, where the electromagnetic environment is intricate and
cluttered, obtaining perfect channel state information remains
challenging.
A. Related Works
Existing studies, as summarized in TABLE I, have explored
channel estimation in RIS-assisted wireless systems, including
least square (LS), minimum mean square error (MMSE) [16],
matrix factorization [17], and compressed sensing [18] meth-
ods. Despite the great potential of these techniques, the high
demands on the antenna array response (e.g., sparsity) and the
high complexity of the required computations greatly restrict
their practical applications. To address these issues, data-
driven methodologies, notably deep learning (DL) algorithms
[19], have emerged as viable alternatives for dealing with the
complex non-linear correlations inherent in receiving signal
samples. In particular, [20] employed pilot design and non-
local attention modules in neural networks by gradually prun-
ing less significant neurons, reducing the pilot transmission
overhead, and improving channel estimation accuracy.
The performance of DL generally scales with both the
model size and the volume of training data. However, large
models and high-volume datasets impose heavy computational
demands on a single node, often exceeding its computation
capability. Distributed machine learning (DML) is a powerful
solution to address this challenge by leveraging parallel pro-
cessing [21]. It divides data into batches or partitions the model
across multiple compute nodes for concurrent training of
DL models, followed by inter-node communication to update
model parameters. The research in [22] applied DML to down-
link channel estimation in RIS-based networks and proposed
a hierarchical neural network-based DML approach. This
method improves estimation accuracy by pre-classifying user
groups under different scenarios and then training scenario-
specific models using the corresponding data. However, in
DML method, the transmission processes involved in data dis-
tribution and model updates lead to increased communication
overhead and a risk of data leakage, thereby threatening user
privacy.
To address the challenges of high communication overhead
and privacy leakage, federated learning (FL) schemes, as
special kinds of DML, have been recently proposed. In FL,
rather than transmitting the entire dataset, only model updates,
such as the gradients of model parameters, are exchanged.
There have been some important works on how to utilize FL
for RIS channel estimation [23], [24]. Elbir et. al. applied
FL to channel estimation for RIS-assisted MIMO systems
[23]. In comparison with the centralized learning method,
the ChannelNet learning method in [23] significantly lowers
the amount of communication overhead by utilizing the FL
method. However, the performance, while approaching that
of MMSE, remains suboptimal due to the aggregation of
parameter updates from all participating users. Compared to
[23], [24] achieves high-precision channel estimation while
reducing the number of model parameters by integrating a
deep residual network into the FL framework, thereby further
decreasing the communication overhead. In addition, [25]
employs hierarchical residual networks and federated learning
to classify user distribution scenarios, addressing the decline
in channel estimation accuracy caused by uneven user location
distribution. Moreover, the large size of the local learning
models places a significant computational burden on end-
user devices, requiring powerful computing capabilities that
exceed the resources available on many existing devices. To
adapt to the different computing and storage capabilities of
the end-user, the network model needs to be flexibly resizable,
and heterogeneous federated learning (HFL) is ideally suited
to address the requirement. The authors of [26] articulated
customized model aggregation strategies to cope with different
types of heterogeneity and increase the feasibility. Data-free
knowledge distillation techniques were introduced to HFL,
enabling the efficient transfer of model knowledge without
requiring access to raw data. This approach is particularly
beneficial in resource-constrained environments [27].
In multi-user RIS-MIMO networks, channel attenuation
varies significantly among geographically dispersed users.
This variability necessitates partitioning users into multiple
federated learning (FL) groups, with each group aggregating
its own channel model. However, most existing FL applica-
tions in channel estimation do not address the optimization of
user grouping; instead, they use predefined FL groups. This
approach may deteriorate channel estimation accuracy in the
aggregated models. A coalition formation game provides a
framework for multiple agents (players) to cooperate and share
resources (e.g., local model parameters of neural networks) to
form coalitions for mutual benefits or shared goals (e.g., im-
proved channel estimation accuracy). This framework supports
user group partitioning, allowing players to form coalitions
with others to improve their outcomes and determining how
the overall benefits, such as rewards or utility, are distributed
among members. Therefore, the problem of federated learn-
ing user grouping can be readily converted into a coalition
formation game. However, few studies have addressed the FL
user grouping problem by using coalition formation games.
In [28] and [29], coalition formation was employed to quan-
tify user data contribution [28], and prevent user selfishness
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
3
[29]. However, all the above works focus on a single FL
aggregated model. Specifically, the work in [28] was the first
to incorporate coalition games into personalized federated
learning, utilizing Shapley values to assess the contribution
of other users’ models to an individual model, subsequently
selecting parameters that enhance performance and mitigate
degradation from malicious users. Literature The authors of
[29] introduced a coalition member trust mechanism to prevent
selfish devices from harming their coalition, mitigating the
problems of non-independent and identically distributed (I.I.D)
data and communication bottlenecks. Moreover, the authors
of [30] investigated the trade-off between channel estimation
accuracy and communication overhead in centralized compu-
tation using clustering algorithms and proved the algorithm’s
stable convergence. This reveals the feasibility of combining
coalition formation games with federated learning for channel
estimation.
To address the FL user grouping problem through coali-
tion formation games, two subproblems need to be tackled:
1) Establishing stable coalitions is essential: This involves
designing an overall payoff function, a payoff distribution
policy, and a coalition formation order that align to improve
channel estimation accuracy, while ensuring the existence of
a stable coalition partition. 2) The identification of a stable
coalition partition. In particular, for subproblem 2), the coali-
tion formation of the FL user is mathematically intractable
under an unknown channel model, especially when coupled
with the iterative framework of federated learning. This makes
it infeasible to formulate the overall coalition payoff and
utility distribution among coalition members, both of which
are essential for guiding coalition formation. Conventional
approaches, such as mixed-integer programming and heuristic
algorithms (e.g., ant colony optimization, genetic algorithms),
are no longer applicable. In order to tackle those problems, a
data-driven deep reinforcement learning (DRL) approach can
be considered to address the coalition formation problem. The
authors of [31] introduced the DRL-based coalition formation
solution for peer-to-peer energy trading problem, aiming to
minimize the cost of energy trading. In addition, coalition
formation games are also applied in multi-agent task allocation
to model task preferences of different nodes, enhancing task
completion efficiency through collaboration among multiple
coalitions [32], [33].
B. Motivations and Contributions
Motivated by the above observations and analyses, this
paper proposes a coalition-formation-guided heterogeneous
FL approach for channel estimation in RIS-assisted cell-free
MIMO systems. Specifically, the FL user grouping problem is
modeled as a coalition formation problem, and the existence of
a stable coalition formation solution is theoretically analyzed.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that
proposes a coalition-formation-guided FL method for channel
estimation in RIS-MIMO, which can be readily applied to
MIMO networks. Moreover, achieving stable coalition for-
mation solutions is particularly challenging. To address this
challenge, we will propose a distributed DRL method that
enables each end user to dependently decide whether to leave
or join a coalition namely, a FL user group, thereby alleviating
the burden of a central decision node. To reduce the size
of local models for individual users that have very limited
computational resources, such as smartwatches or tablets, a
heterogeneous FL (HFL)-based approach will be proposed.
Lastly, to accelerate the convergence of the DRL-federated
learning process, further reducing computational burdens on
end users, we design a transfer learning method.
The major contributions of this work are summarized as
follows
• This is the first work to utilize coalition formation to
enhance FL user grouping and significantly improve
channel estimation accuracy. A coalition altruistic order
is proposed, and it is proven that the formulated game
has at least one stable coalition partition solution that (at
least locally) minimizes the overall channel estimation
mean square error (MSE).
• DRL framework, namely, Qmix-based reinforcement
learning, is proposed to seek for the stable coalition
formation solution. The distributed framework facilitates
autonomy and collaboration among the users in the
coalition, where each user can independently make de-
cisions on joining or leaving one coalition based on local
information, while taking into account the interests of the
whole coalition. It significantly reduces the information
exchange overhead, compared with the centralized DQN
approach, but only brings slight channel estimation ac-
curacy loss (for example, approximately 2.5% loss at a
5dB signal-to-noise ratio).
• A HFL-based approach is proposed to reduce the size
of local neural network models for individual users
with very limited computational resources, leading to a
substantial decrease in computational and power costs
during the training process compared to homogeneous
FL. While heterogeneous FL may result in a slight re-
duction in accuracy, it significantly lowers computational
costs (measured in Flops) by 16% and complexity. More
importantly, under the HFL framework, only a part of
model parameters are transmitted, reducing the quantity
of data that models transmit, thus improving data privacy
compared with that of homogeneous FL.
• To
accelerate
the
convergence
of
HFL,
we
pro-
pose
a
transfer
learning
approach,
referred
to
as
“FL+RSRP+Dis”, which incorporates both received sig-
nal reference power (RSRP) and distance similarity met-
rics to enhance the initialization of local model parame-
ters.
C. Organizations
The RIS-assisted wireless communication system is first
introduced in the paper, followed by the problem formulation.
Then, a deep learning method for downlink channel estimation
is subsequently presented. Section II discusses the system
model along with the foundational models. In Section III, a
coalition game-enabled federated learning method is proposed
to address the channel estimation problem. Section IV presents
numerical results and analyzes convergence and complexity.
Concluding remarks are given in Section V.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
4
Fig. 1: RIS-assisted cell-free MIMO network.
II. SYSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM FORMULATION
An RIS-assisted cell-free MIMO wireless downlink com-
munication system is considered, as illustrated in Figure 1.
This system comprises B BSs and K user equipment (UEs).
Each BS is equipped with Nt antennas, while each UE is
equipped with a single antenna. A single RIS comprising
N elements is deployed between BSs and UEs to enhance
the signal quality. All BSs jointly serve each UE, with the
beamforming vector from the BSs to UE k denoted by
Fk = [f1,k, ...fb,k, ..., fB,k]T ∈C(Nt×B)×1, where fb,k ∈
CNt×1 represents the beamforming vector from BS b to
UE k. The phase shift matrix of RIS can be expressed as
Φ = diag
 ejθ1, ejθ2, . . . , ejθN 
∈CN×N, where θn is the
phase-shift coefficient of the n-th RIS element.
A. Channel Modeling
The channel matrix between BS b to RIS and the chan-
nel matrix between RIS to UE k are denoted by Gb ∈
CN×Nt, vH
k ∈C1×N, respectively. The channel matrices can
be represented by the widely used Saleh-Valenzuela channel
model. Specifically, Gb is given by
Gb =
r
N tN
LG
LG
X
l1=1
αG
l1a

ϑGr
l1 , ψGr
l1

ub

ϑGt
l1 , ψGt
l1
T
,
(1)
where LG represents the number of paths between the BS
and the RIS, αG
l1, ϑGr
l1

ψGr
l1

, and ϑGt
l1

ψGt
l1

represent the
complex gain, the azimuth (elevation) angle at the RIS, and
the azimuth (elevation) angle at BS b for the l1-th path.
ub (ϑ, ψ) ∈CNt×1 and a (ϑ, ψ) ∈CN×1 represent the
normalized array steering vector associated to BS b and the
RIS, respectively. For a typical N1 × N2 (N = N1 × N2)
uniform planar array, a (ϑ, ψ) can be represented by [34]
a(ϑ, ψ) =
1
√
N
h
e−j2πd cos(ψ)n1/λi
⊗
h
e−j2πd sin(ψ) cos(θ)n2/λi
,
(2)
where n1 = [0, 1, ..., N1 −1]T and n2 = [0, 1, ..., N2 −1]T , λ
is the carrier wavelength, and d is the antenna spacing which
is typically set to d = λ/2.
Similarly, the channel matrix between RIS to UE k, denoted
by vH
k can be represented by
vH
k =
r
N
Lk
Lk
X
l2=1
αk
l2a

ϑk
l2, ψk
l2
T
,
(3)
where Lk represents the number of paths between the RIS and
the k-th user; αG
l2, ϑGr
l2 , and ψGr
l2
represent the complex gain,
the azimuth angle, and the elevation angle at the RIS for the
l2-th path.
It is assumed that the channels between BSs and UEs are
completely obstructed. It is worth noting that the model can
be easily extended to scenarios involving direct BS-UE links.
Given the influence of cascaded channel gain quality on the
received signal quality from the BS, this study focuses on the
estimation of cascaded channel gains.
Consequently, the signal received by UE k from BSs is
yk =
B
X
b=1

vH
k ΦGbfb,k
	
sk + nk = ϕhkFksk + nk,
(4)
where sk represents the pilot signal, ϕ =diag(Φ) ∈C1×N,
hk =diag(vH
k )G ∈CN×(Nt×B), G = [G1, ..., Gb, ..., GB] ∈
CN×(Nt×B) represents the cascaded channel between BSs
and UE k. Note that during the channel estimation process,
both the phase shift matrix Φ of RIS and the beamforming
vector Fk at BSs are predetermined and known to both
communication parties like pilot signals. Thus, the task of
downlink channel estimation is to estimate the channel matrix
hk given Φ and Fk.
To
address
the
computational
challenge,
a
federated
learning-based approach is introduced for downlink cascaded
channel estimation. The following two subsections introduce
the deep neural network (DNN) model utilized at the UE.
Building upon this, a transfer-learning based model is pre-
sented.
B.
Basic DNNs Model for Local Channel Estimation
At the UE, a DNN is deployed for downlink cascaded
channel estimation, establishing a non-linear mapping between
received pilots and cascaded channel parameters. This complex
mapping is mathematically represented by
ˆhb,k = fω(yb,k),
(5)
where fω(·) stands for the non-linear mapping function gov-
erned by the weight parameters ω, ˆhb,k is the estimated
channel matrix from the b-th BS to k-th UE. To effectively
train the DNN, the UE accumulates a sufficient volume of
training data beforehand. The training dataset is defined by
{yb,k, hb,k}Db,k , ∀b, k, where hb,k is the target channel matrix
from the b-th BS to k-th UE, and Db,k represents the size of
training dataset for the k-th UE served by the b-th BS. The
loss function can be represented by
L(ω) =
1
Db,k
X
Db,k
ˆhb,k −hb,k

2
2 ,
(6)
The goal of training the DNN is to minimize the loss
function by optimizing the weight parameters ω, i.e.,
min
ω L(ω) =
1
Db,k
X
Db,k
∥fω (yb,k) −hb,k∥2
2 .
(7)
Upon defining the objective function, the DNN undergoes
iterative optimization using the given training dataset. In each
iteration t, the weights ω are updated using gradient descent,
i.e.,
ωt+1 = ωt −ηtg (ωt) ,
(8)
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
5
where ωt and ωt+1 are the weights in the t-th and (t + 1)-
th iterations for DNN, respectively. Additionally, g (ωt) is
the gradient vector for ωt, and ηt is the learning rate. After
training the DNN, the UE can estimate the channel directly
based on the trained DNN.
However, the requirement of sending user data to a central-
ized node, such as a BS, for unified training incurs substantial
overhead and raises significant privacy concerns. To address
this issue, we utilize a distributed learning paradigm known
as FL, which enables decentralized training.
C. FL-based Channel Estimation Network Training
Compared with DNN-based methods, the proposed FL-
based method reduces communication overhead and enhances
privacy, as FL only requires the exchange of model parameters.
This leads to a significant reduction in communication costs.
The FL integrates DNN and can be fundamentally divided into
several procedures:
• FL user group selection: The central node (CN) identifies
a subset of UEs, denoted by c
M ⊂{1, 2, ..., M} to
participate in the FL process. We refer to the UEs in
c
M as the active UEs.
• Model broadcast: The CN broadcasts the current t-th
global model ωg
t to the active UEs.
• Local gradient calculation: Each active UE calculates
its local gradient by utilizing its dataset. The gradi-
ent is achieved as g
 ωl
m,t

≜∇L(ωg
t , Dm), where
∇L(ωg
t , Dm) is the gradient of L at ωt = ωg
t .
• Model aggregation: Active UEs transmit their computed
local gradients g
 ωl
m,t

to the CN via wireless channels.
Subsequently, the CN aims to compute a weighted ag-
gregate of these local gradients
n
g
 ωl
m,t

: m ∈c
Mt
o
,
which is used to update the global model. Adopting the
prevalent FL configuration from [35], the weight of each
local gradient vector is normalized. The global gradient
vector can be thus represented as
rt ≜
X
m∈c
Mt
(
αm
P
i∈c
Mt αi
g
 ωl
m,t

)
,
(9)
where αm represents the corresponding weight attributed
to UE m’s contribution in the update of the global
model’s parameters, such as distance weight. Therefore,
(8) can be written as
ωt+1 = ωt −ηtrt.
(10)
III. COALITION FORMATION FOR FL ENABLED CHANNEL
ESTIMATION
In this section, we design a coalition formation-guided FL
framework for channel estimation by integrating the previously
introduced DNN and FL approaches. First, each local user
trains the DNN using the data that they have collected.
Next, to reduce communication overhead and improve channel
estimation accuracy, we introduce a coalition formation-guided
FL (CFFL) architecture, where a DRL method is employed to
intelligently guide the coalition formation. Finally, to enhance
the efficiency of the framework, we further integrate transfer
learning into the CFFL method.
A. DNN for the Downlink Channel Estimation (DCE)
To augment the volume of data available to individual
UEs and enhance estimation accuracy, we present a strategy
wherein geographically proximate neighboring UEs, within a
certain radius from the active UE, contribute a portion of their
data to train the DNN network of the active UE. This approach
not only ensures an adequate supply of training samples
but also minimizes communication overheads compared with
conventional distributed ML paradigms. Therefore, a higher
learning efficiency and lower transmission overhead can be
achieved.
A deep neural network (DNN) architecture is adopted,
comprising three convolutional layers followed by a linear
layer. Each convolutional layer includes a series of operations:
a convolutional operation, a batch normalization operation, and
an activation function, respectively
Considering that both received pilot signal yb,k and the cas-
caded channel hb,k are complex, the DNN inputs and outputs
are transformed to real-valued representations. Specifically,
yb,k is reshaped into a Q1 ×Q2 2-dimensional matrix, with its
real and imaginary components serving as dual input feature
maps for the first convolutional layer. The DNN output is
structured as a 2N ×M-element vector, where the first N ×M
entries correspond to the real part of hb,k, and the remaining
N × M entries represent its imaginary counterpart.
Without loss of generality, we assume that UE k is sur-
rounded by a total of Z neighboring UEs. The aim of training
the DNN is to minimize the sum of the loss functions by
optimizing the weights ω, i.e.,
min
ω L(ω) =
1
Dk
X
Dk
∥fω (yk) −hk∥2
2
+
Z
X
z=1
(
1
Dz
X
Dz
∥fω (yz) −hz∥2
2
)
,
(11)
where Dz ≥aDk, a is an empirical value, generally set to
0.1 [36].
B. Transfer Learning-based Channel Estimation
The FL process involves the iterative training of local mod-
els followed by the aggregation of a global model, which can
result in prolonged training times. To accelerate model conver-
gence, while maintaining high accuracy in channel estimation,
two types of transfer learning strategies are documented. The
fundamental concept is that the DNN network weights of a
central node are not trained from scratch; instead, they are
initialized based on the trained DNN network weights of
neighboring central nodes. This initialization incorporates a
weighted aggregation of the weights from neighboring nodes,
considering both distance proximity and the similarity of the
received reference signal power (RSRP) [37] to these nodes.
This approach facilitates the determination of the central
node’s initial DNN network parameters; thereby, accelerating
subsequent DNN parameter iterations. The details of the
two types of transfer learning strategies are presented in the
following sections.
The first strategy is distance (Dis)-similar transfer learning.
Given that users close to one another are likely to exhibit
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
6
similar environmental conditions and channel characteristics,
transferring federated channel estimation models across prox-
imate spatial locations not only accelerates training but also
maintains a certain level of accuracy. The weight under the
first transfer strategy is represented as
α
′
m =

1 −Lm
L , Lm ≤L, m = 1, 2, . . . , K
0, otherwise
(12)
where Lm represents the distance between UE m and the CN
aggregating the global model, and L is the predefined reference
distance for normalization. Finally, replacing α
′
m with αm in
(9) results in the “FL+Dis” strategy.
The second strategy of FL is based not only on Dis-
similarity, but also integrates power similarity (hereinafter
referred to as “RSRP+Dis”.This is motivated by the insights
drawn from BS association rules prevalent in cellular net-
works. When the received signal power of two neighboring
users closely matches the RSRP [37], it suggests a strong
likelihood that the two signals of neighboring users have
experienced similar channel fading; hence, sharing comparable
channel fadings.
Consequently, the weight under the second transfer learning
strategy can be formalized as
α
′′
m =
( n
1 −|Pm−Pcenter|
2∆
o
α
′
m, Pcenter −∆< Pm < Pcenter + ∆
0, otherwise
,
(13)
where Pm represents the power of the channel sample at UE
m, while Pcenter represents the predetermined central reference
power level at the center user, ∆represents the predefined
range of comparable power levels [36]. Finally, replacing α
′′
m
with αm in (9) results in the “FL+RSRP+Dis” strategy.
C. HFL Enabled Channel Estimation
In the above application of the FL algorithm, the CN’s
and users’ devices share the same neural network structure
as well as data properties, and are therefore referred to as
homogeneous FL; whereas in reality, the local user generally
has very limited computational and power capacity and is
not capable of handling neural network training with high
computational complexity and power consumption. To address
that, a HFL-based approach is proposed that reduces the
size of local neural network models for individual users,
leading to a substantial decrease in computational costs and
power consumption during the training process compared to
homogeneous FL. The algorithm for HFL is described in
Figure 3.
The whole channel estimation process is executed itera-
tively, with each round including 6 steps:
Step 1- Global model broadcast: A central/edge server or
node leverages its superior computing capabilities to provide
a powerful global model. A global model Wg is initialized at
the central server, which is larger than the users’ private neural
network models. Within the heterogeneous FL framework, the
global model Wg is decomposed into the shared part W 1
g and
distillation part W 2
g , as shown in Figure 4. Wg is distilled into
a small neural network Wf that is broadcast to and used by
local users. Note that Wf is composed of W 1
f and W 2
f as
Fig. 2: The concept of heterogeneous federated learning net-
works.
Fig. 3: Aggregation process of heterogeneous federated learn-
ing model.
depicted in Figure 4. The structure of W 1
g is identical to that
of W 1
f , but with different parameters.
Step 2- Local model upload: After receiving Wf, each local
users train their individual local models to minimize MSE
(i.e., update Wf independently1) by utilizing their respective
data set collected by themselves. Finally, the local user l’s
private local model is obtained, denoted by Wl, which can be
decomposed into the shared part W 1
l and distillation part W 2
l .
Step 3- Shared part aggregating of the global model: After
user l completes training its local model, the user proceeds
to transmit the parameters of the shared part W 1
l
through
the dedicated channel. The central server first aggregates the
parameters of the shared part based on the average criterion
and generates the shared part parameters of the global model,
that is
W 1
g = (
L
X
l=1
βlW 1
l )/L,
(14)
where L is the number of users, βl is the weight of l-th model
parameter in the global model aggregation.
Step 4- Distillation part training of the global model:
The central server proceeds to train the distillation part W 2
g
through part of the data set. Note that to reduce the user’s
downlink data privacy, we use the data collected by the edge
1Note that though we assume all users share the same neural network size,
it can be easily extended to situations where users have different model size.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
7
Fig. 4: Composition of models.
Fig. 5: Coalition formation diagram for channel estimation in
RIS-assisted cell-free MIMO networks.
server. Specifically, we consider the reciprocity of uplink and
downlink channels [38]. During the uplink transmission phase,
the data uploaded by users to BS are stored as training data
samples for this phase. By estimating the downlink channel
and leveraging channel reciprocity, we obtain the uplink chan-
nel information.
After Steps 3 and 4, a global model is generated. Different
from traditional homogenous FL approach, we first distill the
global model before broadcasting it to the local users.
Step 5- Global model distilling: Specifically, local user
model Wf is obtained by distilling Wg. The network structure
of Wf is identical to that of the user’s model. W 1
f shares the
same model parameters as W 1
g , while the parameters of the
distillation part W 2
l is initialized independently. In the training
process, the data set is utilized, and only the distillation part,
i.e., W 2
f is iteratively updated till convergence is achieved or
the maximum epoch is reached. Then, model Wf, which has
the same network structure as the user’s local model, is finally
obtained.
Step 6- Global model broadcast: Next round of HFL starts.
The central server broadcasts Wf to the users for the sub-
sequent round of channel estimation training. Note that after
training, the server uses the global model Wg, while the local
users utilize the distilled models Wf for the HFL process.
Remark 1. Under the HFL framework, the size of local neural
network models for individual users is reduced, leading to a
substantial decrease in computational and power costs during
the training process, compared to homogeneous FL. While
HFL results in a slight reduction in accuracy, it significantly
lowers computational costs (measured in flops) and com-
plexity. Additionally, under the homogeneous FL framework,
only a portion of the model parameters is transmitted during
the training process. This approach reduces the quantity of
data exchanged; thereby, enhancing privacy protection for
Fig. 6: CFFL for channel estimation in RIS-assisted cell-free
MIMO networks.
individual users.
D. Coalition Formation-enabled FL Method
To enhance channel estimation accuracy in FL frameworks,
whether homogeneous or heterogeneous, optimizing the user
grouping strategy is an effective approach. This optimization
facilitates the construction of a high-quality aggregation neural
network; thus, improving channel estimation accuracy. In this
context, a coalition is a FL user group. The FL user grouping
problem is converted into a coalition formation problem.
Accordingly, a CFFL method is documented to improve the
accuracy of the HFL approach.The details are described as
follows. First, the initial coalition combinations are determined
using a reinforcement learning algorithm. Each user employs
its local dataset to perform DNN-based channel estimation,
generating a locally trained model. The model parameters
from local users are then transmitted to the central node
of each coalition via the uplink channels. Subsequently, the
central node performs federated learning model aggregation
and distributes the aggregated and distilled model to each user
within the coalition. The global utility of the current coalition
combination is evaluated by averaging the normalized mean
square error (NMSE) across all users within the coalition.
This NMSE value serves as a reward for the reinforcement
learning algorithm, which updates the coalition combinations
iteratively. This process is repeated until convergence. In what
follows, we present two reinforcement learning approaches of
coalition formation, namely i) DQN-enabled coalition forma-
tion, and ii) Qmix-enabled coalition formation.
1) DQN-enabled Coalition Formation
In this section, DQN is utilized to solve the FL coalition
formation problem. The flow diagram, which is presented in
Figure 6 illustrates the initial round of the first epoch in CFFL.
Following this, a total of T epochs and each epoches consists
of E rounds are executed. Then we introduce the state, action,
and reward of the DQN in the CFFL framework as follows.
• State : St = {Ct, Dt} is defined as the state information
of the coalition combination at t-th epoch, in which Ct =
{c1,t, ..., cK,t} ∈R1×K (with ck,t = 0, 1, .., J) is the
current coalition choice of K users, ck,t = 0 represents
the k-th user who does not join any coalition and trains
on its own, J denotes the maximum number of coalitions.
Dt ∈R1×J is the set of number of users in J coalitions.
• Action : At = {Ct} is the coalition choice of all users.
• Reward : Rt = 1 −e, in which e represents the average
channel estimation accuracy of all users after one epoch
of CFFL.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
8
Fig. 7: Qmix-enabled coalitions formation.
2) Qmix-enabled CFFL
DQN is a centralized algorithm that constructs a large
joint action-value mapping function from global observa-
tions. However, it may lead to a rapid increase in complex-
ity as the number of users grows, while failing to satisfy
privacy-preserving and communication-efficient requirements.
Alternatively, distributed frameworks can be applied, wherein
each agent has its local observation and makes decisions
independently. Qmix is a distributed reinforcement learning
algorithm, where each agent has its individual value function.
These individual value functions are then combined into a
global value function for the entire team through a centralized
mixing network. Correspondingly, the distributed framework
facilitates autonomy and collaboration among the users in the
coalition, where each user can make decisions based on local
information, while also taking into account the interests of the
whole coalition with the help of the mixing network.
In Qmix architecture, each user can only achieve the ob-
servation of which coalition it joins and has no information
on the decisions of other users. This design eliminates the
need for information exchange, which consequently reduce
communication costs associated with tracking other users’
coalition choices. In the training process, the coalition is
initialized. Based on their current action and the observed
state S, including {C, D}, each user calculates the Q-value,
as shown in Figure 7. Subsequently, the Q-values obtained by
each user along with all the information about the observed
environment will be uniformly input into the mixing network.
The network is trained to generate the global Q-value as well
as the Q-value weights for each user. Each user’s Q network
is iteratively updated to maximize the global Q value until
convergence or the end of training.
During the execution phase, users don’t need to go through
the mixing network for centralized execution; they can execute
actions through their own Q network by using their current
action and the information concerning the number of users in
the coalition.
3) FL User Coalition Formation Game
The traditional coalition formation game divides the set
of players into several disjoint sets through the cooperation
between users, and the players of the game pursue the maxi-
mization of their own interests. In this section, the participating
UEs in channel estimation are game players, forming distinct
coalitions, where members within each coalition engage in
model aggregation through federated learning. According to
the previous analysis, we configure the utility of the entire
network as the aggregate sum of utilities across all coalitions.
The coalition game model can be represented as
G = {K, U(S), S} ,
(15)
where K is the set of UEs participating in the game for channel
estimation, S = {S1, ..., SJ} represents the coalition structure
formed among these UEs. ck,t = j means that, at t-th epoch,
UE k belongs to coalition Sj, and U(Sj) is the utility of
coalition j.
The utility all coalitions is formulated as
U =
X
Sj∈S
U (Sj) ,
(16)
where U (Sj) = A −PP
p=1 ej,p is the utility of coalition j,
A is a positive constant introduced to ensure non-negativity
of utilities, and ej,p represents the normalized mean squared
error between the estimated channel for UE p within coalition
j and the true channel. The utility assigned to the p-th user in
the j-th coalition, denoted by u (aj,p), is given by
u (aj,p) =
|aj,p|
P
q∈Sj |aj,q|U (Sj) ,
(17)
where |aj,p| represents the magnitude of data volume con-
tributed by UE aj,p.
4) Analysis of Nash Equilibrium (NE)
The design of a preference order that ensures a stable coali-
tion structure while maximizing the global utility is crucial
for guiding coalition formation. The preference relationship
of altruistic criteria between coalition S1 and coalition S2 is
formally defined in Definition 1.
Definition 1. For any UE k ∈K, and two coalitions S1 ⊆S
and S2 ⊆S, the altruitic criterion is defined as
S1 ≻j S2 ⇔uj (S1) +
X
k∈S1\{j}
uk (S1) +
X
k∈S2\{j}
uk (S2\{j})
>uj (S2) +
X
k∈S1\{j}
uk (S1\{j}) +
X
k∈S2\{j}
uk (S2) .
(18)
It means that when UE k joins a new coalition, the utilities
of both the newly formed coalition, and the original coalition
to which UE k previously belonged, are improved.
Theorem 1. There is at least one stable coalition structure
under the altruitic criterion, and the optimal deconstruction
of the utility maximization problem of the whole network is a
stable coalition structure.
Proof: Refer to Appendix A. ■
IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS AND PERFORMANCE ANALYSES
In the simulation, we consider a scenario comprising 4 BSs,
1 RIS, and 10 UEs. Each BS is equipped with Nt = 16 = 4×4
antennas, while the RIS consists of N = 64 = 8×8 elements.
All channel data utilized in this analysis were extracted from
the DeepMIMO dataset [39]. The two-dimensional geographi-
cal distribution of the 10 UEs is shown in Figure 8. The white
box represents the distributed buildings along the streets. The
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
9
Fig. 8: Sparse distribution scenario: two-dimensional geo-
graphical distribution of 10 users.
Fig. 9: Channel correlation coefficient with 10 sparse users.
main street (the horizontal one) is 600 m long and 40 m wide,
the cross street (the vertical one) is 440 m long and 40 m
wide. The two streets have buildings on both sides, the height
of every building is marked in the figure.
Along the main street, all the buildings have bases of the
same dimensions, 30 m × 60 m and the buildings have bases
of 60 m × 60 m in the second street. In the HFL framework,
the model of the center node has 5 convolutional layers as
well as 1 fully connected layer, while the model of the edge
nodes has only 3 convolutional layers and 1 fully connected
layer. For the shake of fairness, the pilot signal length used
for MMSE is set to 1024, whereas the proposed algorithm
employs a pilot signal length of 128. Some of the parameters
of this section are given in Table II.
TABLE II: Parameter Settings
Parameters
Value
Parameters
Value
Number of BSs B
4
Number of UEs K
10
Number of RISs R
1
Number of BS antennas Nt
4 × 4 = 16
Number of RIS elements N
8 × 8 = 64
Number of samples per user
4000
Batch size for training
64
Training test ratio
9
Learning rate
1e−3
Epoch
6000
Maximum number of coalitions
3
System Bandwith
100MHz
A. Impact of user channel correlation on the resulting formed
FL user coalition
To verify the rationality of the resulting coalition formation,
we investigate the relationship between the formed coalition
and user channel correlation. Without loss of generality, we
Fig. 10: Dense distribution scenario: two-dimensional geo-
graphical distribution of 10 users.
consider 10 UEs under two scenarios: sparse and dense distri-
butions, as illustrated in Figure 8 and Figure 10, respectively.
Without loss of generality, the maximum number of coalitions
is set to 3.
For the sparse scenario, the user channel correlation coef-
ficients are shown in Figure 9. Of note the channel corre-
lations among users vary, motivating the grouping of users
with strong channel correlation to improve the efficiency
of federated learning. Applying the proposed algorithm, the
resulting user actions (i.e., coalition choices) are At
=
[1, 0, 3, 3, 2, 0, 2, 0, 1, 1], where 0 indicates that the user does
not join the coalition, and other numbers indicate which
coalition the users joins. As can be seen in Figure 8, though
being geographically neighboring nodes, 2 users (e.g., the 5th
and 6th users) are not necessarily placed in the same coalition.
This is reasonable, as indicated in Figure 9, where the channel
correlation between the 5th and 6th users is weak. In contrast,
users 1, 9, and 10 are grouped in the same coalition due to
their high channel correlation, as illustrated in Figure 9.
A similar conclusion can be achieved for the dense distribu-
tion scenario. As shown in Figure 10, the actions of all users
are At = [3, 3, 0, 2, 0, 2, 1, 0, 1, 2]. For instance, the channel
correlation between User 2 and User 5 is weak, and they do
not choose the same coalition. In addition, User 2 prefers to
join the same coalition as User 1 rather than User 10, as the
channel correlation between User 2 and User 1 is stronger.
This can be observed from the first row of Figure 11. The
above analysis highlights the significant impact of channel
correlation on coalition formation and algorithm performance,
thereby demonstrating the validity of the proposed algorithm.
B. Channel estimation accuracy comparison
The
performance
comparisons
between
the
proposed
scheme and several benchmark algorithms are illustrated in
Figure 12. Note that to show the performance gains brought
by coalition formation, except “DQN+FL” and “Qmix+HFL”,
all other algorithms in Figure 12 assume that all users form a
single large FL group rather than being divided into multiple
coalitions. The following conclusions can be achieved. 1)
Impact of SNR: It is shown that when the SNR increases,
all algorithms achieve higher estimation accuracy. 2) NMSE
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
10
Fig. 11: Channel correlation coefficient with 10 intensive
users.
Fig. 12: NMSE versus SNR under different algorithms.
gains from transfer learning: Compared with the “DML”,
conventional “FL”, “MMSE algorithm”, and “DCE method”,
the “FL+Dis” and “FL+RSRP+Dis” improve channel esti-
mation accuracy by 33% ∼50%. Therefore, we conclude
the integration of transfer learning significantly enhances
NMSE performance. This is because the transferred model
has already captured a portion of the underlying channel
features, and subsequent training further refines the model,
enhancing estimation accuracy. Besides, it can be seen that
“FL+RSRP+Dis” outperforms “FL+Dis” in channel estima-
tion accuracy. This is because, compared to strategies that
consider only distance similarity, “FL+RSRP+Dis” integrates
both RSRP and distance similarity enables the usage of more
accurate similar channel estimation neural network parameters
for transfer, as illustrated in (13) and (9). 3) HFL-based
Algorithm: The HFL-based algorithm (“HFL+RSRP+Dis”)
outperfroms other benchmark methods by at least 5% but
slightly underperforms compared to homogeneous federated
learning (“FL+RSRP+Dis”) by 3%. This is due to the slight
reduction in feature extraction capability in the distilled small
model compared to the original large model. However, model
distillation significantly reduces computational and hardware
requirements for users (detailed numerical analyses are pre-
sented in Section IV-G). 4) Impact of reinforcement learning:
The introduction of reinforcement learning algorithms im-
proves federated learning performance. While “Qmix+HFL”,
Fig. 13: The performance of DQN-based algorithm at different
SNR vs epochs.
a distributed decision-making algorithm, shows slight perfor-
mance degradation compared to the “DQN+FL”, its NMSE
performance ranks just below that of “DQN+FL”. Addition-
ally, in the SNR range of 0 to 2 dB, Qmix+HFL achieves
approximately a 30% improvement in NMSE compared to
“HFL+RSRP+Dis”.
C. Impact of training SNR on performance
Figure 13(a) depicts the convergence process of the DQN-
enabled federated learning, where the training SNR (i.e., the
SNR of the sample data) is set to 0 dB, 5 dB, 10 dB, and 15 dB,
respectively. It is seen that rewards improve as SNR increases,
which is reasonable. Figure 13(b) depicts how NMSE varies
with epochs during DQN training. The performance of CFFL
is much better compared to “FL+RSRP+Dis” in Figure 12.
For example, when SNR= 5 dB, the NMSE achieved by the
proposed algorithm is around −16 dB. Notably, compared
with “FL+RSRP+Dis” and “FL+Dis” (all users form one large
FL group, instead of being divided into different groups),
our proposed CFFL brings NMSE gains of 18% and 28%,
respectively. This is because with the reinforcement learning
method, the coalition can more reasonably divide the users into
different FL groups. In other words, users experiencing similar
channel fading are grouped into a coalition; thus, enhancing
the effectiveness of federated learning. Consequently, this
results in a more accurate global model for each FL group
and improves channel estimation accuracy.
D. Performance comparison of HFL and FL, DQN and Qmix
Figure 14 compares the channel estimation performance re-
sulting from the formation of federated learning user coalitions
guided by DQN and Qmix, as well as by homogeneous and
heterogeneous federated learning methods. We set SNR= 5
dB. The performance of federated learning based on Qmix,
i.e., “Qmix+FL”, is about 97.5% of that achieved with DQN,
indicating a slight decrease in reward. This is because Qmix,
as a distributed algorithm, only utilizes its local observation
information and its own Q-network in the neural network exe-
cuting phase, leading to a performance degradation compared
to the centralized DQN model. Meanwhile, the performance
of HFL is about 96.8% of that of homogeneous federated
learning algorithms. However, as aforementioned, a slight
decline in channel estimation performance is compensated by
significant reduction in information exchange, local user model
complexity, and an improvement in user privacy security.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
11
Fig. 14: Rewawrd vs Epochs under different algorithms.
Fig. 15: The performance of DQN-based algorithm at different
sizes of RIS vs epochs.
E. Impact of RIS size on performance
Figure 15 illustrates the performance of the DQN-based
algorithm as the RIS size varies. The figure shows that the
accuracy of channel estimation decreases with an increasing
number of RIS elements. For example, at epoch 4000, the
NMSE decreases by 11.4%, 28%, and 45.1% for RIS numbers
of 64, 100, and 225, respectively, compared to a element
number of 36. This decline occurs because changes in RIS
size do not affect the signal dimensionality at the users, while
the cascaded channel matrix grows larger in dimension. Given
that the dimensionality of the received signal, the amount
of sample data, and the network structure remain the same,
inferring cascaded channels of larger dimensions (i.e., network
outputs) becomes more challenging, leading to a degradation
in performance.
F. Impact of neural network size on the channel estimation
accuracy
Figure 16 shows how the number of neural network layer af-
fects the channel estimation accuracy. Take the heterogeneous
Qmix algorithm as an example. The results indicate that as
the number of layers in the heterogeneous network decreases,
channel estimation accuracy also declines. For instance, at
epoch 5000, the NMSE decreases by 14.1% for convolutional
layer numbers of 4 (i.e., “Qmix+HFL+4conv”) and by 25% for
a layer number of 3 (i.e., “Qmix+HFL+3conv”), compared to
a convolutional layer number of 5 (i.e., “Qmix+FL+5conv”).
It is because of the reduced inference capability due to the
decrease of the neural network layer. Therefore, it is important
to select an appropriate neural network layer by balancing
estimation accuracy with the hardware capabilities of the
deployed devices.
Fig. 16: The performance of Qmix-based algorithm at different
network layer vs epochs.
TABLE III: Model complexity comparison between HFL and
homogeneous FL. The number of users is 10. The model of
the GPU is RTX 1660S.
Network
FL
HFL
Improvement
Total parameter
8,428,416 (5 convolutional layers and 1
fully connected layer)
8,409,856 (3 convolutional layers and 1
fully connected layer)
0.22%
Flops
0.84882272G (1 big local model)
0.695730176G (1 distilled local model)
18.04%
Total Flops
9.337044992G (1 big global model and
10 big local models)
7.806124032G (1 big global model and
10 small local models)
16.40%
Time for 1 Epoch (s)
1.05349256
0.893589525
15.18%
G. Model complexity comparison between FL and HFL
Model complexity is compared between HFL and homo-
geneous federated learning. The time taken to complete each
episode is averaged over 10 episodes. In HFL, users generate
a small (distilled) local model, while the central server utilizes
a larger global model. In contrast, homogeneous FL employs
large neural network models for both users and the central
server, resulting in significant differences in model complexity.
As shown in Table III, HFL reduces computational overhead
by approximately 16%.
H. Communication overhead comparison
The comparison of communication interactions among the
four algorithms of CFFL is listed in Table IV. Specifi-
cally, K denotes the number of users, WF L denotes the
number of model parameters to be transmitted by a sin-
gle user in homogeneous FL, WHF L denotes the number
of model parameters to be transmitted by a single user in
HFL. Consequently, the amount of interactions for DQN-
based FL in a round is 2KWF L. Let E denote the num-
ber of rounds to be performed in each epoch, O represent
the amount of environmental information observed by the
user, A indicate the amount of action information transmitted
by the user, and P denote the policy information provided
by the executive network. Then, the total amount of com-
munication interactions for DQN-FL used in an epoch is
given by E (2KWF L) + K[(O + A) + P]. Let T1, T2, T3, T4
represent the number of converged epochs for “DQN+FL”,
“DQN+HFL”, “Qmix+FL”, “Qmix+HFL”, respectively. Then
the total amount of communication interactions for DQN-
FL is given by T1 · {E (2KWF L) + K[(O + A) + P]}. The
total communication interactions for the other algorithms can
be calculated in a similar manner. It can be observed from
Section III-C that the amount of communication interaction
is primarily determined by the number of model parameters,
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
12
TABLE IV: Comparison of communication interactions
One Round of FL
One Epoch of CFFL
The total amount of interaction data required until convergence
DQN + FL
2KWF L
E (2KWF L) + K[(O + A) + P]
T1 {E (2KWF L) + K[(O + A) + P]}
DQN + HFL
2KWHF L
E (2KWHF L) + K[(O + A) + P]
T2 {E (2KWHF L) + K[(O + A) + P]}
QMIX + FL
2KWF L
E (2KWF L) + K[(O + (Cmax + 1)) + (Cmax + 1)]
T3 {E (2KWF L) + K[(O + (Cmax + 1)) + (Cmax + 1)]}
QMIX + HFL
2KWHF L
E (2KWHF L) + K[(O + (Cmax + 1)) + (Cmax + 1)]
T4 {E (2KWHF L) + K[(O + (Cmax + 1)) + (Cmax + 1)]}
specifically WHF L and WF L. The difference in the num-
ber of parameters between FL and HFL in one round is
given by 2KWF L −2KWHF L, where K = 10, WF L =
8.428M, WHF L = 8.409M under the scenario settings. For
the difference in communication interactions between DQN
and Qmix, it mainly depends on the dimensions of the action
size that needs to be determined and the dimension of the
vector executing the policy, specifically A = (Cmax +1) K =
40, P = 40, where Cmax = 3 is the maximum number
of coalitions. This difference becomes larger as the number
of users increases. Thus, the difference in the amount of
algorithmic communication interactions becomes signigcantly
large after E rounds and T epochs of iterations.
V. CONCLUSION
A coalition formation-guided HFL channel estimation
method was proposed. In particular, we utilized Qmix to
implement distributed reinforcement learning for coalition
formation, which enhancing the grouping of FL users. Ad-
ditionally, Qmix facilitates autonomy and cooperation among
users in the coalition, where each user can independently make
decisions based on local information, while considering the
interests of the entire coalition. This approach significantly
reduces the overhead associated with information exchange
compared to the centralized DQN method. Furthermore, the
HFL-based approach was proposed to reduce the size of local
neural network models for individual users. Numerical results
showed that although HFL slightly reduces channel estima-
tion accuracy, it significantly lowers computational cost and
complexity, and reduces training duration by approximately
15%. More importantly, HFL transmits only a subset of model
parameters, reducing the amount of data transmitted and better
protecting local user privacy compared to homogeneous FL.
Simulations revealed that, proposed method reduces the end-
user computational overhead by 16%, improves data privacy,
and enhances channel estimation accuracy by 20%. Of note
in our context, the HFL (without coalition formation) and
the DQN-enabled homogeneous FL serve as the lower and
upper performance bounds, respectively. The Qmix-enabled
algorithm outperforms the lower performance bound baseline
by 25% while maintaining an accuracy loss of less than 4%
compared to the upper-performance bound.
APPENDIX A
Considering the altruistic cooperation among UEs, the util-
ity function of UE j is defined as
U = u (am,j) +
X
i∈Sm\{j}
u (am,i) +
X
i∈Sn
u (an,i) ,
(19)
where Sm represents the coalition that UE j leaves, Sn
represents the new coalition that UE j chooses to join, Sm\{j}
represents the coalition Sm after removing UE j. The potential
function is defined as
φ =
X
j∈Sk,Sk∈S
u (ak,j) .
(20)
If the UE unilaterally changes its coalition choice from Sm
to Sn, then the UE utility function changes by
U ′ −U =





u′ (an,j) +
X
i∈S′n\{j}
u′ (an,i) +
X
i∈S′m
u′ (am,i)





−


u (am,j) +
X
i∈Sm\{j}
u (am,i) +
X
i∈Sn
u (an,i)



=

u′ (an,j) −u (am,j)
	
|
{z
}
1⃝
+





X
i∈S′n\{j}
u′ (an,i) −
X
i∈Sn
u (an,i)





|
{z
}
2⃝
+





X
i∈S′m
u′ (am,i) −
X
i∈Sm\{j}
u (am,i)





|
{z
}
3⃝
(21)
where S′
m represents the coalition that UE j leaves, S′
n
represents the new coalition that UE j chooses to join.
On the other hand, since the UE unilaterally changes its
coalition selection, the change in the potential function can be
calculated as
φ′ −φ =





X
j∈Sk,Sk∈S′
u′ 
ak,j






−





X
j∈Sk,Sk∈S
u

ak,j






=
n
u′ 
an,j

−u

am,j
o
|
{z
}
4⃝
+







X
i∈S′n\{j}
u′ 
an,i

−
X
i∈Sn
u

an,i








|
{z
}
5⃝
+







X
i∈S′m
u′ 
am,i

−
X
i∈Sm\{j}
u

am,i








|
{z
}
6⃝
+







X
i∈Sk,,Sk∈S′\

S′n,S′m
	 u′ 
ak,i

−
X
i∈Sk,Sk∈S\{Sn,Sm}
u

ak,i








|
{z
}
7⃝
(22)
Since UE j unilaterally changes its coalition choice, it will
only affect the coalition from which UE j is departing and to
which it is joining, namely Sm, Sn, S′
m, S′
n. Therefore,
7⃝in
(22) is 0. In addition,
1⃝=
4⃝,
2⃝=
5⃝,
3⃝=
6⃝. Hence, we
have
φ′ −φ = U ′ −U.
(23)
(23) indicates that when UE j (∀j) independently changes
its coalition selection, the variation in the utility function is
equal to that of the potential function. This implies that the
coalition formation game is an exact potential game, which
indicates that there is at least one pure strategy Nash equi-
librium [40]. Consequently, no UE can improve its utility by
unilaterally changing its coalition. Since the potential function
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
13
and the objective function are positively and linearly related,
maximizing the potential function is equivalent to maximizing
the utility of the coalition formation of the whole network.
This concludes the proof of Theorem 1.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Liu, N. Qi, X. Li, A. A. A. Boulogeorgos, T. A. Tsiftsis, M. Xiao,
and J. R¨oning, “IRS channel estimation in cell-free MIMO network: A
coalition formation guided federated learning approach,” IEEE Wireless
Communications and Networking Conference(WCNC), 2025.
[2] F. Boccardi, R. W. Heath, A. Lozano, T. L. Marzetta, and P. Popovski,
“Five disruptive technology directions for 5G,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 74–80, 2014.
[3] E. G. Larsson, O. Edfors, F. Tufvesson, and T. L. Marzetta, “Massive
MIMO for next generation wireless systems,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 186–195, 2014.
[4] E. Bj¨ornson, J. Hoydis, and L. Sanguinetti, “Massive MIMO networks:
Spectral, energy, and hardware efficiency,” Found. Trends Siganl Pro-
cess, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 154–655, 2017.
[5] X. Zhang, H. Qi, X. Zhang, and L. Han, “Spectral efficiency improve-
ment and power control optimization of massive mimo networks,” IEEE
Access, vol. 9, pp. 11 523–11 532, 2021.
[6] H. Yang, Z. Xiong, J. Zhao, D. Niyato, L. Xiao, and Q. Wu, “Deep
reinforcement learning-based intelligent reflecting surface for secure
wireless communications,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communi-
cations, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 375–388, 2021.
[7] E. Bj¨ornson, “A programmable wireless world with reconfigurable
intelligent surfaces,” July. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=9cBn5piI9Ms
[8] X. Jindan, Y. Chau, H. Chongwen, H. Naveed Ul, G. C. Alexandropou-
los, M. D. Renzo, and M. Debbah, “Reconfiguring wireless environments
via intelligent surfaces for 6G: reflection, modulation, and security,”
SCIENCE CHINA Information Sciences, vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 130 304–,
2023.
[9] K. Zhi, C. Pan, H. Ren, K. Wang, M. Elkashlan, M. D. Renzo,
R. Schober, H. V. Poor, J. Wang, and L. Hanzo, “Two-timescale design
for reconfigurable intelligent surface-aided massive MIMO systems with
imperfect CSI,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 69,
no. 5, pp. 3001–3033, 2023.
[10] T. Zhou, K. Xu, X. Xia, W. Xie, and J. Xu, “Achievable rate optimization
for aerial intelligent reflecting surface-aided cell-free massive MIMO
system,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 3828–3837, 2021.
[11] K. Wang, N. Qi, X. Guan, Q. Shi, M. Xiao, S. Jin, and K.-K. Wong,
“Transmit/passive beamforming design for multi-IRS assisted cell-free
MIMO networks,” IEEE Systems Journal, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 6282–6291,
2023.
[12] T. Noh and J. Choi, “Cell-free MIMO systems powered by intelligent
reflecting surfaces,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 26, no. 5, pp.
1076–1080, 2022.
[13] K. Wang, N. Qi, M. Xiao, S. Hu, and B. Sihlbom, “Fairness-aware
location and hybrid beamforming optimization in IRSs-aided cell-
free MIMO system,” in 2023 IEEE/CIC International Conference on
Communications in China (ICCC), 2023, pp. 1–6.
[14] H. Liu, N. Qi, K. Wang, T. A. Tsiftsis, W. Wang, and Y. Liu, “Network
deployment with energy efficiency optimization in IRS-assisted cell-free
MIMO system,” Physical Communication, vol. 63, p. 102287, 2024.
[15] K. Wang, N. Qi, H. Liu, A.-A. A. Boulogeorgos, T. A. Tsiftsis,
M. Xiao, and K.-K. Wong, “Reconfigurable intelligent surfaces aided
energy efficiency maximization in cell-free networks,” IEEE Wireless
Communications Letters, vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 1596–1600, 2024.
[16] D. Mishra and H. Johansson, “Channel estimation and low-complexity
beamforming design for passive intelligent surface assisted MISO wire-
less energy transfer,” in IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2019, pp. 4659–4663.
[17] Z.-Q. He and X. Yuan, “Cascaded channel estimation for large intelligent
metasurface assisted massive MIMO,” IEEE Wireless Communications
Letters, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 210–214, 2020.
[18] K. Ardah, S. Gherekhloo, A. L. F. de Almeida, and M. Haardt, “Trice:
A channel estimation framework for RIS-aided millimeter-wave MIMO
systems,” IEEE Signal Processing Letters, vol. 28, pp. 513–517, 2021.
[19] H. Feng, Y. Xu, and Y. Zhao, “Deep learning-based joint channel
estimation and csi feedback for RIS-assisted communications,” IEEE
Communications Letters, vol. 28, no. 8, pp. 1860–1864, 2024.
[20] M. B. Mashhadi and D. G¨und¨uz, “Pruning the pilots: Deep learning-
based pilot design and channel estimation for MIMO-OFDM systems,”
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 20, no. 10, pp.
6315–6328, 2021.
[21] S. Hu, X. Chen, W. Ni, E. Hossain, and X. Wang, “Distributed
machine learning for wireless communication networks: Techniques, ar-
chitectures, and applications,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials,
vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1458–1493, 2021.
[22] L. Dai and X. Wei, “Distributed machine learning based downlink
channel estimation for RIS assisted wireless communications,” IEEE
Transactions on Communications, vol. 70, no. 7, pp. 4900–4909, 2022.
[23] A. M. Elbir and S. Coleri, “Federated learning for channel estimation
in conventional and RIS-assisted massive MIMO,” IEEE Transactions
on Wireless Communications, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 4255–4268, 2022.
[24] W. Shen, Z. Qin, and A. Nallanathan, “Federated learning enabled
channel estimation for RIS-aided multi-user wireless systems,” in 2022
IEEE International Conference on Communications Workshops (ICC
Workshops), 2022, pp. 812–817.
[25] B. Qiu, X. Chang, X. Li, H. Xiao, and Z. Zhang, “Federated learning-
based channel estimation for RIS-aided communication systems,” IEEE
Wireless Communications Letters, vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 2130–2134, 2024.
[26] F. Yu, W. Zhang, Z. Qin, Z. Xu, D. Wang, C. Liu, Z. Tian,
and X. Chen, “Heterogeneous federated learning,” 2022. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.06767
[27] Z. Zhu, J. Hong, and J. Zhou, “Data-free knowledge distillation
for heterogeneous federated learning,” vol. 139, pp. 12 878–12 889,
18–24 Jul 2021. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/
zhu21b.html
[28] L. Wu, S. Guo, Y.-X. Ding, Y. Zhan, and J. Zhang, “A coalition
formation
game
approach
for
personalized
federated
learning,”
ArXiv, vol. abs/2202.02502, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://api.
semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:246634014
[29] S. Arisdakessian, O. A. Wahab, A. Mourad, and H. Otrok, “Coalitional
federated learning: Improving communication and training on non-iid
data with selfish clients,” IEEE Transactions on Services Computing,
vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 2462–2476, 2023.
[30] Z. Wang, F. Yang, S. Yan, S. Memon, Z. Zhao, and C. Hu, “Joint design
of coalition formation and semi-blind channel estimation in fog radio
access networks,” China Communications, vol. 16, no. 11, pp. 1–15,
2019.
[31] M. Sadeghi and M. Erol-Kantarci, “Deep reinforcement learning based
coalition formation for energy trading in smart grid,” pp. 200–205, 2021.
[32] W. Dai, A. Bidwai, and G. Sartoretti, “Dynamic coalition formation and
routing for multirobot task allocation via reinforcement learning,” pp.
16 567–16 573, 2024.
[33] K. Xiong, T. Zhang, G. Cui, S. Wang, and L. Kong, “Coalition game of
radar network for multitarget tracking via model-based multiagent re-
inforcement learning,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic
Systems, vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 2123–2140, 2023.
[34] C. Hu, L. Dai, T. Mir, Z. Gao, and J. Fang, “Super-resolution channel
estimation for mmwave massive MIMO with hybrid precoding,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 67, no. 9, pp. 8954–8958,
2018.
[35] H. B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A.
y Arcas, “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from
decentralized data,” in International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
and Statistics, 2016.
[36] C.
Tan,
F.
Sun,
T.
Kong,
W.
Zhang,
C.
Yang,
and
C.
Liu,
“A survey on deep transfer learning,” 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:51929263
[37] N. Gupta1, “5G Cell Selection Criteria,” https://www.telecomhall.net/t/
5g-cell-selection-criteria/23860, Jun. 2023, (accessed Feb. 2024).
[38] X. Hu, R. Zhang, and C. Zhong, “Semi-passive elements assisted chan-
nel estimation for intelligent reflecting surface-aided communications,”
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 21, no. 2, pp.
1132–1142, 2022.
[39] A. Alkhateeb, “Deepmimo: A generic deep learning dataset for mil-
limeter wave and massive mimo applications,” in Proc. of Information
Theory and Applications Workshop (ITA), San Diego, CA, 02 2019, pp.
1–8.
[40] D. Monderer and L. S. Shapley, “Potential games,” Games and Economic
Behavior, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 124–143, 1996.
