1
Communication Efficient Cooperative Edge AI via
Event-Triggered Computation Offloading
You Zhou, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Changsheng You, Member, IEEE, and Kaibin Huang, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Rare events, despite their infrequency, often carry
critical information and require immediate attentions in mission-
critical applications such as autonomous driving, healthcare, and
industrial automation. The data-intensive nature of these tasks
and their need for prompt responses, combined with designing
edge AI (or edge inference), pose significant challenges in systems
and techniques. Existing edge inference approaches often suffer
from communication bottlenecks due to high-dimensional data
transmission and fail to provide timely responses to rare events,
limiting their effectiveness for mission-critical applications in
the sixth-generation (6G) mobile networks. To overcome these
challenges, we propose a channel-adaptive, event-triggered edge-
inference framework that prioritizes efficient rare-event process-
ing. Central to this framework is a dual-threshold, multi-exit
architecture, which enables early local inference for rare events
detected locally while offloading more complex rare events to edge
servers for detailed classification. To further enhance the system’s
performance, we developed a channel-adaptive offloading policy
paired with an online algorithm to dynamically determine the
optimal confidence thresholds for controlling offloading decisions.
The associated optimization problem is solved by reformulating
the original non-convex function into an equivalent strongly
convex one. Using deep neural network classifiers and real
medical datasets, our experiments demonstrate that the proposed
framework not only achieves superior rare-event classification
accuracy, but also effectively reduces communication overhead,
as opposed to existing edge-inference approaches.
Index Terms—Rare event detection, edge inference, event-
triggered offloading, cooperative edge AI, channel-adaptive com-
putation offloading.
I. INTRODUCTION
The sixth-generation (6G) mobile networks are envisioned
to enable a wide range of intelligent applications by integrating
edge artificial intelligence (AI) and network sensing. By
combining the computational power of edge AI with the
pervasive sensing capabilities of networked devices, these
networks aim to provide intelligent real-time services across
diverse scenarios [1]–[3]. Among the critical applications of
6G networks, the timely detection and processing of rare but
high-impact events, such as security breaches or medical emer-
gencies, stands out as a key challenge. Rare events, though
infrequent, often carry critical information that demands im-
mediate attention and efficient resource allocation. However,
the data-intensive nature of AI-driven applications, coupled
with the need for energy-efficient processing, complicates the
Y. Zhou and K. Huang are with the Department of Electrical and Electronic
Engineering (EEE), The University of Hong Kong (HKU), Hong Kong SAR,
China (Email: zhouyou@eee.hku.hk, huangkb@eee.hku.hk). C. You is with
the Department of EEE, Southern University of Science and Technology
(SUSTech), China (Email: youcs@sustech.edu.cn). The corresponding author
is K. Huang.
ability to respond promptly to these events within constrained
resources. To address these challenges, our work introduces the
framework of dynamic cooperative inference. This framework
facilitates adaptive collaboration between devices and edge
servers to split the execution of AI algorithms, specifically
targeting the efficient detection and processing of rare events.
By leveraging an event-triggered approach, the framework
significantly minimizes unnecessary radio-access transmis-
sions, alleviating communication bottlenecks, and enabling the
resource-efficient deployment of AI-powered sensing systems
in 6G networks.
Rare events, offer unique opportunities to enhance the
split inference framework by prioritizing high-impact data
and optimizing resource allocation. Split inference, a popular
architecture for edge AI, partitions an inference task between
a device and a server to overcome the device’s resource
constraint. This design offloads complex computations to edge
servers while allowing devices to handle initial processing,
significantly reducing the latter’s computational burdens and
also the communication overhead. Research has shown that
split inference improves the inference accuracy under dynamic
channel conditions [4], reduces communication costs [5], [6],
and supports hardware-limited devices [7]. Additionally, split
inference takes advantage of the sparsity of intermediate data
by incorporating feature compression to reduce communi-
cation overhead [8]. However, this method remains insuffi-
cient device’s transmission of high-dimensional intermediate
features still create a substantial communication bottleneck.
This poses a critical issue in rare-event scenarios where high-
priority data require immediate and precise transmission. Joint
source-and-channel coding frameworks improve robustness in
noisy environments [9], but their fixed transmission strategies
does not recognize the urgency of rare events, potentially
delaying critical responses. Similarly, advanced solutions such
as integrated sensing and communication (ISAC) frameworks
[10] and task-oriented over-the-air computation (AirComp)
[11] address communication constraints in multi-device sys-
tems but lack the capability to dynamically prioritize rare,
high-impact data. Similarly, existing methods as batching and
early exiting [12] optimizes throughput but fails to prioritize
critical information, treating all data equally. These limitations
restrict the system’s ability to deliver timely and efficient
responses in critical scenarios. Addressing this gap requires
integrating event-triggered mechanisms to detect and prioritize
rare events, allowing systems to reduce unnecessary transmis-
sions while ensuring rapid responses. By incorporating such
mechanisms, split inference can overcome communication
bottlenecks and fully realize its potential in handling high-
arXiv:2501.02001v1  [cs.LG]  1 Jan 2025
2
stakes, rare-event scenarios.
Computation offloading, with split inference as a specialized
branch for task classification, offloads computationally inten-
sive tasks from resource constrained devices to resourceful
servers, thereby overcoming the former’s limitation in storage-
and-computation capacities and energy [13]–[20]. Recent re-
search has developed energy-efficient offloading controllers for
asynchronous systems with dynamic event arrivals [15], re-
source allocation techniques for satellite-aerial edge networks
[16], and dynamic voltage and frequency scaling (DVFS)
methods to adjust computational speed based on demand
[17]. However, despite these advances, existing approaches
overlook the unique demands and potential efficiency gains
associated with rare, high-impact events. Specifically, tradi-
tional models typically distribute the workload of all events
uniformly between devices and servers without favouring rare
events in resource allocation and as a result, fail to meet their
mission critical requirements [21]. Similarly, while techniques
such as Lyapunov optimization adapt offloading decisions to
dynamic network states to minimize execution delay, they fail
to differentiate between routine and critical tasks, potentially
delaying responses to high-priority events [18]. In addition to
their inability to prioritize rare events, many existing methods
struggle with excessive communication overhead. Offloading
techniques such as UAV trajectory optimization and user
scheduling aim to reduce latency, but they do not address
the high-dimensional data generated during rare events, which
often overwhelms network capacity [19]. Similarly, lagrange
coded computing frameworks enable fast and secure offload-
ing, but their fixed coding and transmission strategies are
inefficient for handling the sporadic nature of rare events
[20]. Similar limitation exist for techniques such as resource
optimization in satellite-aerial edge networks focusing pre-
planned allocations [16]. In summary, event-triggered offload-
ing presents an opportunity to overcome the communication
bottleneck of existing techniques. By selectively focusing on
critical, high-impact events, computational workload and net-
work congestion can be significantly reduced, leading to more
efficient resource allocation and meeting the requirements of
mission critical applications.
Building on the preceding discussion, it is evident that rare
events and their associated sparse access patterns are important
considerations for optimizing resource utilization in 6G com-
munication systems. Sparse access, characterized by sporadic
device activity, has been extensively studied in the context
of Internet of Things and machine-type communications net-
works for its potential to enhance the communication effi-
ciency [22]. For instance, compressed sensing techniques en-
able signal reconstruction from fewer measurements to reduce
computational overhead at sensor nodes [23]. On the other
hand, grant-free access schemes exploit sparse traffic patterns
to minimize contention delays in random access protocols [24].
Additional advancements, such as integrated sensing and com-
munication frameworks [25] and adaptive anomaly detection
methods [26], further enhance the multi-access efficiency by
leveraging the sporadic nature of device activity. Despite these
advancements, existing sparse access techniques still have
significant limitations. In particular, many existing methods
for rare event detection are confined to primitive tasks, such
as monitoring simple environmental parameters (see e.g., [27],
which do not address the complex sensing requirements of
6G networks [28]. Furthermore, while sparse access research
has made substantial progress, its integration with channel
dynamics remains insufficiently explored. This is useful given
the unpredictable nature of rare events and the variability of
network and channel conditions. For instance, systems like
collision avoidance in autonomous driving critically depend on
the seamless integration of rare-event detection with channel-
adaptive mechanisms to ensure timely and accurate responses
under dynamic network environments [29]. These gaps un-
derscore the necessity of a channel-adaptive, event-triggered
system capable of dynamically adjusting computation and
communication based on real-time channel conditions and
event criticality.
To address the issue, we consider an event-triggered system
designed for rare-event detection in edge AI applications. The
objective of this system is to maximize end-to-end (E2E)
rare event classification accuracy while operating within con-
strained communication and computation resources. Achieving
this objective requires a framework that integrates efficient
event detection, adaptive inference, and dynamic offloading
techniques. In this work, we present an event-triggered frame-
work that combines early exiting (see e.g., [30]) and channel-
adaptive computation offloading. This framework dynamically
adjusts computation and communication based on the real-time
channel state, enabling efficient communication inference. The
key contributions and findings are summarized as follows.
• Design of Dynamic Inference Architecture: We propose
a novel event-triggered cooperative inference framework,
refered to as co-inference, featuring a dual-threshold,
early-exiting architecture. This system enables efficient
local binary tail-event detection while offloading rare,
high-impact events to the server for refined multi-class
classification. The dual thresholds create an uncertainty
region where events that cannot be confidently classified
continue to subsequent blocks for a decision with better
confidence. This flexibility allows highly confident events
to exit early for rapid local inference, while uncertain
events are processed further, and complex rare cases are
offloaded to the server for detailed analysis. By balancing
the event’s missing target probability and offloading prob-
ability, the framework effectively balance the tradeoff be-
tween communication and computation while preserving
high inference accuracy, making it particularly suitable
for long-tail distributed events.
• Channel-Adaptive
Offloading
Policy
Design
with
Threshold Optimization: To enhance E2E classifica-
tion performance under energy and communication con-
straints, we develop a channel-adaptive offloading policy
and an algorithm to dynamically determine the optimal
dual-thresholds on confidence for rare event offloading.
This policy enables real-time rare event offloading, ef-
fectively balancing local computation with offloading
workload to adapt to varying channel conditions. By
transforming the non-convex optimization problem into
3
Edge Device
Edge Server
Label Feedback
Multi-label 
 Classification
Inferred label 
“Intruder”
Long-tailed 
event
Light-weight 
model
“Tail”
Binary  
classified label
Tail Event 
Checking 
Y
N
Feature 
Offloading
Event Feature 
Extraction
Transmitted Feature
Event number
Categories
…
Feature Receiving
Alarm Feedback
Fig. 1: Edge co-inference system.
a strongly convex equivalence, our approach maximizes
rare event classification accuracy under constraints on
energy consumption and communication overhead.
• Experiments: The effectiveness of our proposed event-
triggered co-inference system is demonstrated using real
medical datasets across various CNN architectures (i.e.,
ShuffleNet and MobileNet [31], [32]). The results reveal
a significant reduction on both computation and commu-
nication overhead while consistently outperforming tradi-
tional split-inference techniques in term of classification
accuracy.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The dy-
namic co-inference system models and metrics are introduced
in Section II. An overview of the co-inference architecture
is demonstrated in Section III. The dual-threshold multi-exit
model and tradeoffs during event offloading are presented
in Section IV, while the offloading policy is introduced and
the dual-threshold for rare event classification is optimized
in Section V. Section VI reports the experimental results,
followed by concluding remarks in Section VII.
II. MODELS AND METRICS
We consider an edge co-inference system, depicted in Fig.
1, where an edge server collaborates with a mobile device
to perform inferences for a sequence of events in the local
device’s event queue. The event queue follows a first-in-first-
out (FIFO) order. Unlike existing works that primarily focus
on balanced data distribution, this paper addresses the practical
scenario of unbalanced data. Specifically, we focus on a long-
tailed distribution model, characterized by a majority of head
(normal) events and a minority of tail (rare) events [33]. The
specific models and metrics are described in the sub-sections.
A. Inference Model
1) CNN Classification with Early Exiting: We adopt the
CNN model, commonly used for image recognition and pro-
cessing, which includes multiple convolutional (CONV) layers,
pooling layers, rectified linear unit (ReLU) correction layers,
and fully-connected (FC) layers. Let X ∈RN×Lh×Lw denote
the tensor of intermediate feature maps received at the edge
server from an input event. Here, N represents the number
Fig. 2: Illustration of a backbone model with early exiting.
of feature maps, each with height Lh and width Lw. Given
the ground-truth label for an event m, denoted as ˆℓm, the
server can compute the posterior Pr(ℓm|X) using the forward-
propagation algorithm and estimate the label ˆℓm by maximiz-
ing the posterior probability, i.e., ˆℓm = argmax ℓmPr(ℓm|X).
To address the high communication cost caused by large
original input data (e.g., 3D images and films), we employ an
early-exiting model, allowing for classification at earlier stages
instead of traversing the entire CNN structure. Following the
standard architecture in the literature, the early-exiting model
at the edge server divides the CNN model into N consecutive
blocks, each followed by a classifier that can predict the
label using the extracted features, as illustrated in Fig. 2.
An intermediate classifier is a simplified neural network with
fewer layers compared to the conventional CNN block.
2) Local Inference Energy Consumption: In the context
of CNNs, the local inference energy is influenced by both
memory access and arithmetic operations. However, memory
access typically consumes significantly more power compared
to arithmetic operations [31]. Therefore, we focus on char-
acterizing energy consumption and latency based on memory
access operations. Given one CNN contains N blocks, the
local energy consumption can be calculated as follows [18]:
Eloc(N) =
N
X
i=1
Smem
i
ϱ,
(1)
where Smem
i
denotes the number of memory access operations
at the i-th block, and ϱ is the energy per memory access
operation.
B. Communication Model
In our extended modeling of energy consumption for co-
inference scenarios, we account not only for the computational
energy required by the local device but also for the energy
expended during the transmission of uplink features. The
energy required to offload is primarily influenced by the size
of the extracted feature maps being transmitted from the local
device to the edge server. Representing the size of the feature
input data as D and the transmit power of the mobile device
as Ptr, the energy consumed during the feature offloading can
4
be quantified as:
Eoff = Ptr
D
Rtr
,
(2)
where Rtr represents the transmission rate for offloading
events. The transmission rate depends on the available band-
width B, channel gains G, and noise power σ2, and can be
computed using the equation [14]:
Rtr = B log(1 + SNR).
(3)
In practical scenarios, Ptr is often maintained constant to
simplify power management in wireless devices. During each
coherent time, the channel conditions can vary significantly
due to factors such as environmental changes, mobility of the
transmitter and receiver, and other dynamic elements affecting
the channel. Consequently, the SNR during each coherent time
may differ, leading to variations in the transmission rate Rtr
and offloading energy Eoff.
C. Performance Metrics
1) Classification Accuracy: The classification accuracy is
defined as the proportion of correctly categorized events
among the whole testing dataset. Its empirical accuracy typ-
ically approximates the likelihood that an uploaded event is
accurately identified. Let bxm, xm denote the predicted label
and the ground truth label of event m, respectively. The event
m is accurately inferred if ˆxm = xm.
2) Mobile Energy Consumption: The energy consumption
of the mobile device is quantified from the initiation of local
inference until the completion of offloading the intermediate
features to the server. In this context, the overall mobile
energy consumption consists of two distinct components: 1)
the energy consumed by local computation during partial
inference, denoted as Eloc, and 2) the energy consumed during
the offloading process, denoted as Eoff.
III. OVERVIEW OF DYNAMIC CO-INFERENCE
To accurately detect tail events and minimize the device’s
overall energy consumption, we propose a two-stage dynamic
co-inference model, as depicted in Fig. 1. A lightweight CNN
is deployed on the local device for tail event detection, while
a deep CNN on the server handles multi-class classification
of the detected tail events. The system operates through
cooperating two inference models and the controller for dy-
namic co-inference adaptes the model by making offloading
decisions. The advantages of the proposed two-stage dynamic
co-inference model are two-fold. First, it enables a new event-
triggered scheme to significantly reduce the communication
overhead for server inference since a majority of head events
can be successfully detected at the mobile device by properly
designing the early exiting model. Second, the early existing
model also greatly reduces the computation loads at the mobile
device since the head events do not need to traverse all
CNN block layers for detection. In this instance, the precise
configuration of the intermediate classifier, particularly the
threshold settings, is crucial for accurately detecting the event
and significantly influences the model’s performance. The
detailed operations are demonstrated as follows.
Fig. 3: Dual-threshold confidence aware inference progress.
A. Model 1 - Local Inference
The first stage aims to distinguish head and tail events by
using the intermediate classifiers of the local device model.
Specifically, the device will first make a binary classification
to label the input event m into either the head or tail class. By
applying the early exiting technique, the intermediate classifier
Cn(βu, βℓ) is located on the device model’s n-th block for
detection. In particular, the intermediate classifier at each block
n will predict the input event label by comparing the event
confidence score at block n with two confidence thresholds,
namely, the upper threshold βu and the lower threshold βℓ.
The two thresholds are set commonly for all intermediate
classifiers, which will be detailed in Section IV. After going
through the block n, if the event m’s output confidence Cn(m)
is between two thresholds, i.e., βℓ≤Cn(m) ≤βu, the
intermediate feature will be passed to the next block for further
classification. In stage 1, our target is to determine the optimal
threshold set of intermediate classifiers for minimizing the tail
event’s missing probability.
B. Model 2 - Event-Triggered Computation Offloading
If the event m’s confidence score at block n is in the
detectable region, i.e., Cn(m) > βu or Cn(m) < βℓ, the event
can be classified as follows.:
1) If Cn(m) < βℓ, then the event is labeled as a head event,
i.e., bxm →Lhead. In this case, the inference result will be
output immediately after this block, and the co-inference
model will be restarted to detect a new event.
2) Otherwise, if Cn(m) > βu, the event is detected as a tail
event, i.e., bxm →Ltail. In this case, the classifiers in the
subsequent local blocks will be set inactive. However,
the lightweight local CNN model may not perform
well in multi-class classification and could also lead to
significant energy consumption. To address this issue,
we propose to offload the detected tail event’s features
to the server. To minimize the device’s total energy
consumption, an online algorithm for event offloading
decision will be designed in Section V.
IV. DUAL-THRESHOLD BASED EVENT DETECTION -
SCHEME AND TRADEOFF
In this section, we present a new confidence-aware detector
based on dual threshold evaluation. We then show the exis-
tence of a fundamental tradeoff for the scheme between the
(tail-event) missing probability and offloading probability.
5
A. Event Detection Scheme
Generally, an event classifier model generates a confidence
score for each event to indicate its confidence level as a
tail event. Given an imbalanced data distribution, the event
detection by applying a single threshold on confidence can
cause the issue of high (tail-event) missing probability or
(head-event) false-alarm probability. As illustrated in the left
part of Fig. 3, the distributions of head and tail events are
plotted against the tail event confidence score. When a single
threshold is set at the traditional value of 0.5, events with
a confidence score above 0.5 are classified as tail events,
and those below 0.5 are classified as head events. However,
this approach results in significant misclassification: a portion
of head events is incorrectly identified as tail events, and a
substantial portion of tail events is misclassified as head events.
In statistics, this issue can be addressed using dual thresholds,
with one detecting head events and the other for tail events as
proposed in [34]. Inspired by this method, we propose a new
event detector targeting the backbone model with early exiting
(see the right part of Fig. 3), where dual thresholds are applied
to confidence scores generated by intermediate classifiers.
Before delving into the detailed design, it is necessary to
introduce an essential metric for tail-event detection, known
as the confidence score, which is defined below.
Definition 1. Given the m-th input event enters the n-th exit
block of the event-detection model. Let two neuron outputs
of the exit block m be denoted as f tail
n(m) and f head
n(m), which
are associate with the head and tail events, respectively. The
confidence score output by the SoftMax function for detecting
a tail event is defined as [35]:
Ctail
n(m) =
ef tail
n(m)
ef tail
n(m) + ef head
n(m) .
(4)
Next, we apply dual thresholds on the confidence scores
of exit blocks sequentially (in the order of increasing depth)
until the event is classified confidently. To this end, let the
thresholds be denoted as βℓand βu with 0 < βℓ< βu < 1.
The procedures for detecting head/tail events are described in
the sequel.
1) Head Event Detection: Consider the n-th exit block of
the event-detection sub-model and its confidence score defined
in (4). The condition Ctail
n(m) < βℓindicates a head event since
the opposite has a low probability. Furthermore, the sequential
detection requires that βℓ≤Ctail
n(m) ≤βu, 1 ≤n ≤N −1. The
validation of the above conditions can be articulated through
the evaluation of the following asymptotic indicator function:
Ihead
n
(m, βℓ, βu) = σ(βℓ−Ctail
n(m))
n−1
Y
k=1
σ(βu−Ctail
k(m))σ(Ctail
k(m)−βℓ),
(5)
where σ(x) denotes the Verhulst logistic function given as:
σ(y) =
1
1 + e−αy ,
α →∞.
(6)
Note that as α →∞, the logistic function converges to the
Heaviside step function, namely that σ(y) is 1 if y is non-
negative or else 0. Therefore, Ihead
n
(m, βℓ) →1 if the event
is inferred as head at block n or otherwise Ihead
n
(m, βℓ) →0.
If the event is not recognized as tail at the last block N. The
event’s label will be considered as head to avoid the false
alarm issue. Mathematically,
Ihead
N
(m, βℓ, βu) = σ(βu−Ctail
N(m))
N−1
Y
k=1
σ(βu−Ctail
k(m))σ(Ctail
k(m)−βℓ).
(7)
2) Tail Event Detection: Event m is classified as a tail event
under the following condition: Ctail
n(m) > βu, 1 ≤n ≤N.
Before reaching the last block, the condition βℓ≤Ctail
n(m) ≤
βu causes the event to continue to the next exit point [i.e.,
(n+1)-th exit]. Similar to (5), the conditions can be validated
using the following asymptotic indicator function for all n ∈
{1, 2..., N}:
Itail
n (m, βℓ, βu) = σ(Ctail
n(m) −βu)
n−1
Y
k=1
σ(βu −Ctail
k(m))σ(Ctail
k(m) −βℓ).
(8)
An event is classified locally as either a head or a tail event. We
define L(xm, bxm) as the loss function such that L(xm, bxm) =
0 if xm = bxm, or otherwise L(xm, bxm) = 1. Based on (8), the
indicator function that validates one tail event m is correctly
detected using the threshold can be expressed as follows:
Itail(xm, bxm, βℓ, βu) =
N
X
n=1
Itail
n (m, βℓ, βu)[1 −L(xm, bxm)].
(9)
Likewise, a head event m is correctly detected can have the
indicator function as follows:
Ihead(xm, bxm, βℓ, βu) =
N
X
n=1
Ihead
n
(m, βℓ, βu)[1 −L(xm, bxm)].
(10)
Last, it is worth mentioning that a head event is typically
detected at a relatively shallower layer and a tail event at a
relatively deeper layer.
B. Tradeoff Analysis
Let Pmiss and Pfalse denote the probability that a tail event
is incorrectly detected as a head event and the probability that
a head event is falsely detected as a tail event, respectively.
Moreover, let Mtail and Mhead denote the number of tail and
head events among a total of M events. Using the notation,
we can write:
Pmiss(βℓ, βu) = 1 −
PM
m=1 Itail(xm, bxm, βℓ, βu)
M
· M
Mtail ,
M →∞,
= 1 −Ptail, loc(βℓ, βu)
Ptail
,
(11)
where Ptail, loc(βℓ, βu) denotes the probability of events cor-
rectly classified as the tail class locally. Likewise, let
Phead(x, bx, βℓ) denote the probability that a head event is
correctly detected among all events. From (10), Pfalse can be
derived as:
Pfalse(βℓ, βu) = 1 −
PM
m=1 Ihead(xm, bxm, βℓ, βu)
M
·
M
Mhead ,
M →∞,
= 1 −Phead, loc(βℓ, βu)
Phead
,
(12)
6
where Phead, loc(βℓ, βu) denotes the probability of events cor-
rectly classified among all events. We denote Poff as the
probability that one event is detected as tail by the dual-
threshold mechanism and offloaded to the server, namely the
offloading probability. Utilizing (11), (12) and considering
M →∞, we can express Poff using a new form:
Poff(βℓ, βu) =
PM
m=1 Itail(xm, bxm, βℓ, βu)
M
+ Mhead −PM
m=1 Ihead(xm, bxm, βℓ, βu)
M
, M →∞,
= Ptail, loc(βℓ, βu) + Phead −Phead, loc(βℓ, βu),
= (1 −Pmiss(βℓ, βu)) · Ptail + Pfalse(βℓ, βu) · Phead.
(13)
Upon identifying an event as tail, the local device offloads the
event’s relevant features to the server. The server then performs
multi-class classification to achieve an accurate recognition of
the tail event using a deeper CNN.
“Missing-target-offloading tradeoff”: It is observed from
(13) that there exists a fundamental tradeoff between reducing
the missing target probability (Pmiss) and reducing the offload-
ing probability (Poff). Specifically, a larger Poff causes more
events to be detected as a tail, which increases the tail event
classification accuracy. Although Pmiss decreases, all events
must traverse more CNN blocks for detailed classification,
which increases the system’s communication and computation
overhead. The tradeoff is regulated by the dual thresholds
(βℓ,βu). This necessitates their optimization that is the topic
of the next section.
V. OPTIMAL DYNAMIC CO-INFERENCE
Recall that at the core of dynamic co-inference is the
event detection scheme controlled by dual thresholds. In this
section, we optimize the thresholds to maximize the E2E
co-inference accuracy under constraints on communication
overhead (as quantified by the offloading probability) and
mobile energy consumption. By showing its convexity, the
optimization problem is solved using the gradient descent
method. As a result, the optimal offloading policy is revealed
to have a threshold based structure that depends on the channel
SNR.
A. Problem Formulation
Given M events and (9), the indicator function that validates
whether one tail event m is correctly classified at the server
can be expressed as [36]:
Itail(ym, bym, βℓ, βu) = Itail(xm, bxm, βℓ, βu)[1 −L(ym, bym)], (14)
where ym and bym correspond to the predicted and ground
truth labels at the server, respectively. The tail event’s final
classification accuracy can then be derived as follows:
facc(βℓ, βu) =
PM
m=1 Itail(ym, bym, βℓ, βu)
M
· M
Mtail
,
M →∞.
(15)
Considering the device’s average total energy consumption per
event detection, denoted as Etotal, which comprises two main
components: the local computation energy Eloc and the energy
utilized for the offloading of features Eoff. This relationship is
succinctly captured by the following equation:
Etotal(βℓ, βu) = Eloc(βℓ, βu) + Eoff(βℓ, βu),
(16)
where Eloc is determined by summing the local computation
energy consumed during all memory access operations re-
quired per one event detection. From (1), (5) and (8), this
can be mathematically expressed as follows:
Eloc(βℓ, βu) =
PM
m=1
PN
n=1[Itail
n (m, βℓ, βu) + Ihead
n
(m, βℓ, βu)]Eloc(n)
M
,
M →∞.
(17)
Since the offloading energy is applicable only to events
identified as tail events, given the event size D, transmit power
Ptr and the data rate Rtr, the offloading energy is formulated
as:
Eoff(βℓ, βu) = Ptrtoff,
= PtrD
RtrM
M
X
m=1
N
X
n=1
Itail
n (m, βℓ, βu),
M →∞.
(18)
Given the dynamic nature of channel conditions, which im-
pact offloading energy by altering the data transmission rate,
adopting a channel-adaptive optimization strategy is essential.
We assume that within each coherence time, the system can
detect M events and offload those classified as tail-class to the
server. To meet our new energy efficiency goal, we transform
the constraint on offloading probability Poff into a constraint
on the data transmission volume v(βℓ, βu). The optimization
problem is formulated as follows:
(P1)
min
βℓ,βu
−facc(βℓ, βu),
(19)
s.t.
v(βℓ, βu) = D · M · Poff(βℓ, βu) ≤θ,
(20)
fenergy(βℓ, βu) = M · Etotal(βℓ, βu) ≤ξ.
(21)
In P1, the complexity arises from multiple non-convex con-
straints that intertwine tail event detection accuracy with
offloading volume and energy considerations, while also ac-
commodating the variability of communication channels over
coherence times. The challenge is to develop a robust mech-
anism that dynamically adjusts thresholds to maximize the
system performance within acceptable data rate and energy
limits.
B. Channel-Adaptive Threshold Optimization
1) Offloading Feasibility Condition: Since offloading rare
events requires the system to adapt to varying channel condi-
tions, it is essential to understand the channel requirements
needed for the system to perform offloading within given
energy and data volume constraints. By dynamically adjusting
the dual thresholds, the system can classify events at the
earliest possible block, minimizing local energy consumption.
When all events are detected at the first block of the CNN,
local energy use is minimized. If a tail event is detected
and offloading is required, the system must ensure that the
transmission energy required for offloading remains within the
available energy budget: PtrD
Rtr
≤ξ −M · Eloc(1). Under this
7
condition, the offloading feasibility condition is articulated in
the following Lemma.
Lemma 1. (Feasibility Condition). Given the total number of
events M, the bandwidth B, and the energy constraint ξ, the
system is feasible to support offloading if the SNR satisfies
the following condition:
SNR ≥2
PtrD
B (ξ −M · Smem
1
ϱ) −1.
(22)
The inequality highlights that an increase in data size per
event, transmission power, or the total number of events raises
the required SNR, as these factors increase the energy demands
for data transmission. Conversely, enhanced bandwidth capa-
bilities reduce the required SNR by facilitating quicker data
transmission.
2) Optimization of Dual Confidence Thresholds: To solve
P1, it is essential to understand the mathematical properties
of both the objective function and constraints, particularly in
terms of convexity and smoothness. These properties play a
key role in determining the behavior of optimization algo-
rithms and their convergence. To this end, we analyze and
demonstrate the Lipschitz continuity of the functions in P1.
Lemma 2. The gradient of objective function facc(βℓ, βu)
is
Lipschitz
continuous
with
the
Lipschitz
constant
γ = k2 N(N+1)(N+4
√
3−1)
24
.
The proof is given in Appendix A.
Lemma
3. v(βℓ, βu)’s gradient is Lipschitz continuous
with
the
Lipschitz
constant
2DMγ.
fenergy(βℓ, βu)’s
gradient is Lipschitz continuous with the Lipschitz constant
2Mγ

Eloc(N) + PtrD
2Rtr

.
The proof is given in Appendix B.
Since all functions are proved to have a Lipschitz continuous
gradient, the convexity and smoothness of each function in P1
are analyzed in the following Lemma.
Lemma
4. facc(βℓ, βu) is a γ-weakly convex and γ-
smooth function. v(βℓ, βu) is a 2DMγ-weakly convex and
2DMγ-smooth function. Given the data rate Rtr, transmit
power Ptr, and event data size D, fenergy(βℓ, βu) exhibits
2Mγ

Eloc(N) + PtrD
2Rtr

weak convexity and smoothness.
The proof is given in Appendix C.
Subsequently, we propose an approach to obtain an efficient
solution to problem P1 using the proximal-point penalty
method [37]. This method involves constructing a proximal
term and a quadratic penalty term, which associate the con-
straint function with the original objective function. For t-th
iteration, it performs the update:
(β
t+1
ℓ
, β
t+1
u
) = arg min
βℓ,βu ft(βℓ, βu),
(23)
where ft(βℓ, βu) denotes the proximal penalty function. Math-
ematically,
Algorithm 1: Channel Adaptive Dual-threshold Opti-
mization
1: Input: Proximal parameter λ, Penalty parameters κ, ρ,
Smoothness parameter ψ, Convexity parameter η,
Transmit power Ptr, Bandwidth B, Data size D, Event
number M, The local energy consumption at the first
block Smem
1
ϱ.
2: Initialize: β
0
prox =
 
β
0
ℓ
β
0
u
!
, β
0
extra =
 
β
0
ℓ
β
0
u
!
3: for c = 1 to C do
4:
if SNR ≥2
PtrD
B (ξ −M · Smem
1
ϱ) −1 then
5:
Update Rtr(c), ψc and ηc based on current channel
conditions
6:
Update Eoff and f c
energy based on the new Rtr(c)
7:
for t = 0 to T −1 do
8:
Define ft(β) = fmiss(β) + λ
2 ∥β −β
t∥2 +
κ
2 (max{0, Poff(β)})2 + ρ
2
 max{0, f c
energy(β)}
2
9:
for i = 0 to I −1 do
10:
β
(i+1)
prox
= Proxλ,κ

β
(i)
extra −
1
ψc ∇ft(β
(i)
extra)

//Proximal operator
11:
β
(i+1)
extra
= β
(i+1)
prox
+
√ψc−√ηc
√ψc+√ηc (β
(i+1)
prox
−β
(i)
prox)
//Extrapolation step
12:
end for
13:
β
t+1 = β
(I)
prox
14:
end for
15:
end if
16:
Output: β that minimizes ∥β
t+1 −β
t∥across all t
17: end for
ft(βℓ, βu) = facc(βℓ, βu) + λ
2

 
βℓ−β
t
ℓ
βu −β
t
u
!
2
+ κ
2 (max{0, v(βℓ, βu)})2
+ ρ
2 (max{0, fenergy(βℓ, βu)})2 .
(24)
Leveraging the Lemma 4, the convexity and smoothness of
the function ft(βℓ, βu) are established in the Proposition 1.
Proposition 1. Given a sufficiently large proximal parameter
λ, the function ft(βℓ, βu) is strongly convex, with its smooth-
ness parameter ψ and strong convexity parameter η given by:
ψ = γ + λ + κDMA (A + 2γ)
+ ρB

B + 2Mγ

Eloc(N) +
PtrD
2B log (1 + SNR)

,
(25)
η = λ −γ −2Mγ

κAD + ρB

Eloc(N) +
PtrD
2B log (1 + SNR)

,
(26)
where A and B are constants determined by the condition:
A = max

θ, DM(N −1)
2
√
2

,
(27)
B = max

ξ, (N 2 + 1)Eloc(N)
2
√
2
+ (N + 2)(N −1)PtrD
4
√
2B log (1 + SNR)

.
(28)
8
The proof is given in Appendix D.
Acknowledging the smoothness and strong convexity pa-
rameter of ft(βℓ, βu), an algorithm based on accelerated
gradient descent is developed to update the optimal dual
thresholds. After the offloading feasibility condition is checked
using (22), the algorithm adjusts the offloading decision and
data transmission rate for each possible channel condition. By
applying the proximal gradient method, the algorithm refines
the thresholds to maximize event classification accuracy while
maintaining energy efficiency. Additionally, it precomputes
optimal thresholds for various channel conditions and con-
straints, storing them in a lookup table. During operation, the
algorithm quickly references these thresholds based on the
current SNR, ensuring efficient and accurate decision-making.
The operational mechanics are detailed in Algorithm 1. As
the smoothness and strong convexity parameter of the function
ft(βℓ, βu) depend on channel SNR, the algorithm’s efficiency
is inherently influenced by the channel quality, which will be
discussed in the following Remark.
Remark 1. With fixed transmit power Ptr and event data size
D, the convergence rate for resolving each sub-problem in
Algorithm 1 is expressed as:
f(β
(i)) −ft(β
∗) ≤O
 
1 −
r η
ψ
i!
.
(29)
The convergence rate of this dynamic algorithm is modulated
by channel conditions. Specifically, enhanced channel gain in-
creases Rtr, which in turn accelerates the convergence process,
optimizing the algorithm’s performance in variable network
environments. Conversely, an increase in the number of events,
transmission power, or event size can adversely affect system
efficiency by expanding the computational and communication
demands for each iteration.
3) Structure of Optimal Policy: With the optimal dual
thresholds identified through our adaptive optimization frame-
work, the system generates a responsive optimal offloading
policy that aligns with real-time channel conditions to en-
sure resource-efficient operation. The following proposition
formalizes this offloading policy, which dynamically adjusts
the number of events processed locally versus offloaded to the
server according to the varied SNR. The system’s channel-
adaptive offloading policy can be formulated in the Proposition
2.
Proposition 2. (Threshold based Offloading Policy). Given
(β∗
ℓ, β∗
u ) is the optimal solution stored in the lookup table for
the classification of M events under the data volume constraint
θ, energy constraint ξ, and the channel condition specified by
the SNR, the co-inference system’s optimal offloading policy
has the following structure:
1) Given each event’s size is D, none of these events
are offloaded if the SNR does not meet the feasibility
condition in (22), i.e.,
M ∗
off = 0,
SNR < 2
PtrD
B (ξ −M · Smem
1
ϱ) −1.
(30)
2) The system offloads Moff events based on different
channel conditions, specifically:
M ∗
off =
$
B (ξ −M · Eloc (β∗
ℓ, β∗
u )) log(1 + SNR)
PtrD
%
,
SNR ≥2
PtrD
B (ξ −M · Smem
1
ϱ) −1.
(31)
The Proposition highlights that the adaptive offloading
policy strategically dynamically adjusts the dual thresholds
based on SNR conditions, balancing classification accuracy
and resource efficiency under a fixed energy constraint. This
adaptive mechanism optimally selects thresholds for event
classification by adjusting to different SNR scenarios:
1) High SNR: With increased transmission rates under the
same energy constraint, the energy cost for offloading
each event decreases, enabling the system to adjust
the dual thresholds to offload more events with greater
confidence. The system has two possible strategies for
adjusting the dual thresholds. The first strategy is to
lower the upper threshold βu, allowing more events to
be classified as tail and subsequently offloaded to the
server, effectively reducing the miss rate for tail events.
Alternatively, the system can expand the uncertainty area
by lowering the lower threshold βℓand/or increasing the
βu, permitting more events with less certain confidence
scores to pass through additional local CNN layers.
This adjustment ensures that events are more accurately
analyzed locally before offloading, leading to improved
data reliability upon reaching the server and enhanced
overall classification accuracy.
2) Low SNR: Under low SNR conditions, where trans-
mission constraints restrict data offloading, the system
adjusts the dual thresholds by lowering βu and raising
βℓ, effectively narrowing the uncertainty area. This ad-
justment prioritizes earlier classification of head events
locally, helping to maintain a manageable false alarm
rate while allowing the system to conserve computation
energy by quickly filtering out head events without
unnecessary processing.
VI. EXPERIMENTAL RESULT
A. Experimental Settings
The default experimental settings are as follows unless
specified otherwise.
• DNN Model and Dataset Setting: In this study, the
ShuffleNetV2 [31] and MobileNetV2 [32] models are
deployed on the local device, with each block followed by
an intermediate classifier. The ResNet50 [38] model is de-
ployed on the server. The local models were pretrained on
a well-known dataset [39] comprising 25,000 retinal im-
ages, including both normal and unhealthy retina images,
for binary classification. The server model (ResNet50)
was pretrained on the same dataset with one normal
class and three unhealthy retina classes for multi-class
classification. To explore the effects of class imbalance,
each local CNN model was further trained using two
9
separate datasets with imbalance ratios of 4:1 and 9:1.
Here, we consider each image to be one event. For
validation and testing, distinct sets of 1,250 images are
used. The entire validation set was utilized to determine
the optimal threshold for classification. Subsequently, the
1,250 test images were divided into five groups of 250
images each, maintaining the same class imbalance ratio.
Independent classification tests were conducted on each
group using the optimal threshold. Finally, the overall
model performance was assessed by averaging the clas-
sification accuracies and missing probabilities across the
five groups.
• Communication Settings: We consider M images se-
quentially detected locally and decide whether to offload
them to the server for tail classification. To reduce the
communication overhead, each image is resized from 3
× 224 × 224 to 3 × 56 × 56 (i.e., reducing the image
resolution) for offloading. Assuming perfect channel state
information (CSI) at the server, the transmission power
Ptr is fixed at 30 dBm, and the bandwidth B is set to
30 MHz. The fading coefficient h is varied to control
the SNR, calculated as SNR = |h|2Ptr
Pn
where Pn is the
noise power. This setup allows us to observe the impact
of different SNR levels on the data rate, computed using
Shannon’s theorem: Rtr = B log2(1+SNR). By adjusting
h, we simulate varying channel conditions to study their
effect on communication performance.
Three benchmarking schemes from the standard inference
model are adopted, as described below.
• Single Threshold Detection: This traditional approach
[30] employs intermediate classifiers in conjunction with
a single threshold mechanism throughout the network.
At each intermediate stage, the classification decision
is based on the highest confidence score for a class,
provided this score exceeds a predefined threshold. If,
by the final block, no class’s confidence score surpasses
this threshold, the event is automatically assigned to the
head class.
• Terminal Detection: This method eschews intermediate
classifiers and implements a single decision threshold
solely at the final stage of the network [40]. Every event
undergoes full processing through the entire network,
culminating in a single classification decision at the end.
The event is classified as the tail class if the Softmax-
processed confidence level for the tail class at the final
classifier exceeds a specific threshold.
• Ideal Case: In an ideal tail-detection system, it is as-
sumed that all event labels are accurately identified at the
first block on the local device without any errors. This
implies that the system flawlessly distinguishes between
head and tail classes, ensuring that no instances of head
classes are incorrectly classified as tail classes.
B. Comparison of Detection Mechanism with CNN Models
In our comparative analysis of threshold-based classification
strategies using CNNs, we varied the offloading constraint
from 16% to 45% in 1% intervals to evaluate the effectiveness
(a) MobileNetV2
(b) ShuffleNetV2
Fig. 4: Missing probability versus offloading constraints in the case
of imbalanced ratio R = 4.
(a) MobileNetV2
(b) ShuffleNetV2
Fig. 5: Missing probability versus offloading constraints in the cases
of imbalanced ratio R = 4 and R = 9.
of our proposed dual threshold detection mechanism against
established benchmarks. Using datasets with an imbalance
ratio of 4:1, we assessed performance on the MobileNetV2
and ShuffleNetV2 architectures, as shown in Fig. 4(a) and 4(b).
The dual threshold mechanism outperformed the other meth-
ods in identifying the minority class by employing two flex-
ible confidence thresholds for early decision-making, thereby
reducing misclassification and overfitting by intermediate clas-
sifiers. In both models, the performance gain of purposed dual
threshold detection schemes increases because the terminal
detection fails to accurately detect more complex events as the
offloading constraint increases. The single threshold detection
initially showed an advantage over terminal detection due to
its early-stopping capability, which prevents overfitting and
enhances generalization. However, the benefits of the single
threshold mechanism plateaued as the offloading probability
continued to rise. This is because its minimum threshold value
of 0.5 led to consistent misclassification of low-confidence
events as belonging to the head class. Compare to the Mo-
bileNetV2, dual threshold detection demonstrated superior
performance in ShuffleNetV2 at low offloading constraint, due
to ShuffleNetV2’s efficient architecture featuring group convo-
lutions and channel shuffling, which allows it to quickly adapt
and perform well with limited input. Conversely, as offloading
rates and event complexity increased, MobileNetV2’s deeper
network architecture, with depthwise separable convolutions,
exhibited superior feature extraction and class discrimination.
C. Detection
Mechanism
Analysis
across
Imbalanced
Datasets
We continue our investigation into the efficacy of different
detection mechanisms by analyzing their performance across
datasets that exhibit varying degrees of class imbalance, as
demonstrated in Fig.5(a) and 5(b). The datasets are bifurcated
10
(a) MobileNetV2 + ResNet50
(b) ShuffleNetV2 + ResNet50
Fig. 6: Tail classification accuracy versus energy constraints in the
case of imbalanced ratio R = 4, SNR = 5dBm.
into two categories with imbalanced ratios of 4:1 and 9:1,
whilst maintaining an equivalent total number of events.The
single threshold approach has been excluded from this analysis
because it rapidly reaches the offloading limit in highly im-
balanced datasets. In such datasets, many tail events have con-
fidence scores below 0.5, which prevents their offloading and
limits the approach’s effectiveness. As offloading probabilities
increase, the dual threshold method consistently outperforms
the terminal detection scheme, particularly in the dataset ratio
R = 9. This suggests that as the offloading probability
grows, each system begins to struggle with more challenging
instances of the tail class that are not as easily separable
from the head class. The increased imbalance ratio exacerbates
this challenge, as the prevalence of the majority class (head
class) introduces bias in the classifiers. The slower reduction
in the miss rate indicates a trade-off indicates a trade-off
where improved tail class detections come at the cost of more
head class misclassifications. This performance gain highlights
the dual threshold method’s robustness in handling highly
imbalanced data scenarios and its effectiveness in maintaining
classification accuracy under varying offloading constraints.
D. Detection Mechanism Analysis across Energy Constraint
We proceeded to analyze the performance of various detec-
tion models under different energy constraints, focusing on the
efficiency of early-stopping mechanisms within single and dual
threshold models. The offloading data volume constraint was
set at 0.7 MB, with an SNR of 5 dB. The simulation results
are illustrated in Fig. 6(a) and 6(b). The ideal curve assumes
that all events are detected at the first block, allowing the
remaining energy to be utilized for offloading all tail events to
the server for classification. The terminal threshold detection,
lacking an early-stopping feature, cannot be fairly compared to
the other two schemes on MobileNetV2 under the same energy
constraints due to MobileNetV2’s significant depth, which
incurs substantial computational energy consumption. This
approach requires traversing all network blocks to reach a clas-
sification decision. Although it achieves classification accuracy
on ShuffleNetV2, it exhibits the worst performance in terms of
energy efficiency compared to the other schemes, owing to its
inherently higher energy consumption. Under identical energy
constraints, the dual threshold model consistently demonstrates
higher classification accuracy than the single threshold and
terminal threshold schemes. The performance gain becomes
more significant under increasing energy constraints because
(a) MobileNetV2 + ResNet50
(b) ShuffleNetV2 + ResNet50
Fig. 7: Tail classification accuracy versus SNR in the case of
imbalanced ratio R = 4, data volume constraint = 0.7MB.
the dual threshold model can flexibly adjust its two thresholds
to reduce the misclassification of challenging head-class events
as tail-class, thereby conserving energy. However, as event
complexity increases, accuracy converges due to the need for
more network blocks or incorrect tail-class labeling, both in-
creasing energy consumption. Additionally, the ShuffleNetV2
model demonstrates lower energy consumption and a smaller
discrepancy between the real and ideal cases compared to Mo-
bileNetV2. Consequently, while deeper networks can achieve
higher maximum accuracy, they present significant challenges
for energy-constrained applications. This underscores the ne-
cessity of balancing complexity and energy efficiency in the
design of CNNs.
E. Detection Performance Analysis with Varied Channel Con-
ditions
In this study, we investigate the system’s performance across
various channel states. Our comparative analysis involved
subjecting the ShuffleNetV2+ResNet50 model to a 210mJ
energy constraint and the MobileNetV2 to a 60mJ limit, both
with an offloading data volume constraint of 0.7MB, against
a dataset with a 4:1 imbalanced ratio. The corresponding
simulation results are presented in Fig.7(a) and Fig.7(b). As
the SNR increases, there is a concomitant performance gain
in tail classification accuracy for dual threshold detection
mechanism. This relationship can be attributed to enhanced
transmission rates at higher SNRs, which reduce the energy
cost for event offloading. Consequently, within a fixed energy
budget, improved transmission efficiency effectively liberates
additional energy, which can be reallocated to processing
events through more network blocks for precise detection. The
widening gap between schemes and the ideal scenario at higher
SNRs indicates that more complex tail-class events require
traversal through additional network blocks for correct identi-
fication, thereby consuming more energy. The single threshold
detection model, despite improvements in SNR, fails to match
the performance of the dual threshold model. This is because
the single threshold model tends to overfit and lacks an early
exiting mechanism, making it less effective at distinguishing
between head and tail classes in an imbalanced dataset. At
high SNRs, the tail classification accuracy converges due to
the offloading data volume constraint. Within this constraint,
the system can offload a maximum of approximately 30%
of events within a given period, achieving the corresponding
minimum missing probability, as demonstrated in previous Fig.
4(a) and 4(b).
11
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed a dynamic co-inference
framework designed to alleviate communication and compu-
tation bottlenecks while preserving high inference accuracy for
long-tail distributed events. Our system enables local binary
tail detection and optimizes thresholds for offloading tail
events to the server for multi-class classification, balancing the
event’s missing target probability and offloading probability.
To achieve high detection accuracy, we developed a dual-
threshold classifier within early-exiting models. Additionally,
to optimize E2E tail event classification at the server while
considering the device’s energy limitations, we designed an
offloading policy and presented an online algorithm for deter-
mining the optimal confidence threshold for feature offloading.
The optimization challenge was addressed by transforming
non-convex functions into a strongly convex problem.
This work is the first to explore event-triggered cooper-
ative inference systems with a novel dual-threshold based
architecture design, opening numerous opportunities for future
research. One direction could focus on implementing the
architecture in distributed sensing for multi-view systems,
necessitating further exploration of feature dimensionality’s
impact on offloading priority. Additionally, integrating more
stringent transmission requirements, such as ultra-reliable low-
latency communication systems in the context of 6G, warrants
further investigation.
APPENDIX A
PROOF OF LEMMA 2
Consider the single event scenario when m
=
m1.
∀n ∈1, 2, ..., N −1 and let gtail
n (βℓ, βu) = Itail
n (m1, βℓ, βu),
ghead
n
(βℓ, βu)
=
Ihead
n
(m1, βℓ, βu)
and
gtail
N (βℓ, βu)
=
Itail
N (m1, βℓ, βu) . Since |σ(x)| ≤1, |σ(x)
′| ≤
1
4, |σ(x)
′′| ≤
√
3
6 , an upper bound of gtail
n (βℓ, βu)’s spectral norm can be
derived as:
∥∇2gtail
n (βℓ, βu)∥2 ≤∥∇2gtail
n (βℓ, βu)∥F ≤k2(n2 −n
8
+
√
3n
3
).
(32)
Indeed, this upper bound also applies to ghead
n
(βℓ, βu) and
Itail
N (m, βℓ, βu), as they share the same structure of consec-
utive Sigmoid function products as Pn(βu). Likewise, it is
straightforward that
∥∇2ghead
n
(βℓ, βu)∥2 ≤∥∇2ghead
n
(βℓ, βu)∥F ≤k2(n2 −n
8
+
√
3n
3
),
(33)
∥∇2gtail
N (βℓ, βu)∥2 ≤k2(N 2 −N
8
+
√
3N
3
).
(34)
Since gtail
n (βℓ, βu), ghead
n
(βℓ, βu) and Itail
N (m, βℓ, βu) all have
hessians with bounded norms, they all follow Lipschitz con-
tinuous gradient. Let β =
βℓ−βℓ
βu −βu

denotes the differential
vector between two threshold pairs (βℓ, βu) and
 βℓ, βu

, the
inequality holds for that:
∇gtail
n (βℓ, βu) −∇gtail
n (βℓ, βu)
 ≤k2(n2 −n
8
+
√
3n
3
) · ∥β∥,
(35)
∇ghead
n
(βℓ, βu) −∇ghead
n
(βℓ, βu)
 ≤k2(n2 −n
8
+
√
3n
3
) · ∥β∥,
(36)
∇gtail
N (βℓ, βu) −∇gtail
N (βℓ, βu)
 ≤k2(N 2 −N
8
+
√
3N
3
) · ∥β∥.
(37)
Since Itail(xm, bxm, βℓ, βu) contains gtail
n (βℓ, βu), deriving the
partial derivative of Itail(xm, bxm, βℓ, βu) is equalized to calcu-
lating the gradient of gtail
n (βℓ, βu). Mathematically,

∂Itail(ym, bym, βℓ, βu)
∂βℓ∂βu
−∂Itail(ym, bym, βℓ, βu)
∂βℓ∂βu

(a)
≤

N
X
n=1
gtail
n (βℓ, βu)
∂βℓ∂βu
−gtail
n (βℓ, βu)
∂βℓ∂βu

(b)
≤k2 N(N + 1)(N + 4
√
3 −1)
24
· ∥β∥
= γ · ∥β∥,
(38)
where γ = k2 N(N+1)(N+4
√
3−1)
24
denotes the Lipschitz con-
stant of the gradient of Itail(xm, bxm, βℓ, βu), (a) arises from
the fact that 1 −L(xm, bxm) ≤1; 1 −L(ym, bym) ≤1. (b)
arises from the relation that
N
X
n=1
∇gtail
n (βℓ, βu) −∇gtail
n (βℓ, βu)

≤k2
" N
X
n=1
n2 −n
8
+
√
3n
3
#
· ∥β∥.
(39)
Since the Lipschitz constants in (38) does not depend on spe-
cific events, we extend and generalize the preceding inequality
into our objective function:
∇facc(βℓ, βu) −∇facc(βℓ, βu)
 ≤γ · ∥β∥.
(40)
Therefore, the gradient of objective function facc(βℓ, βu) is
proved to be Lipschitz continuous with the constant γ =
k2 N(N+1)(N+4
√
3−1)
24
. Proof of Lemma A is completed.
APPENDIX B
PROOF OF LEMMA 3
Let
h(xm, bxm, βℓ, βu)
denote
a
sequence
of
func-
tion Poff(βℓ, βu)’s nominator, which h(xm, bxm, βℓ, βu)
=
Itail(xm, bxm, βℓ, βu)−Ihead ((xm, bxm, βℓ, βu)+Mhead. Accord-
ing to (35), (36) and (37), it follows that

∂h(xm, bxm, βℓ, βu)
∂βℓ∂βu
−∂h(xm, bxm, βℓ, βu)
∂βℓ∂βu

=

N
X
n=1
Bn
 [1 −L(xm, bxm)]
(c)
≤
N
X
n=1
2k2(n2 −n
8
+
√
3n
3
) · ∥β∥
= k2 N(N + 1)(N + 4
√
3 −1)
12
· ∥β∥
= 2γ · ∥β∥.
(41)
Here, Bn denote the summation of gradient differences from
(35) and (36). Mathematically,
Bn = ∇gtail
n (βℓ, βu) −∇gtail
n (βℓ, βu)
(42)
+ ∇ghead
n
(βℓ, βu) −∇ghead
n
(βℓ, βu).
(43)
12
(c) arises from the inequality

N
X
n=1
Bn
 ≤
N
X
n=1
∇gtail
n (βℓ, βu) −∇gtail
n (βℓ, βu)

+
∇ghead
n
(βℓ, βu) −∇ghead
n
(βℓ, βu)
 .
(44)
Since the Lipschitz constants in (41) do not depend on specific
data, we extend and generalize the preceding inequality into
the constraint function:
∇v(βℓ, βu) −∇v(βℓ, βu)
 ≤2DMγ · ∥β∥.
(45)
In this case, the constraint function’s gradient is demonstrated
to be Lipschitz continuous with the Lipschitz constant 2DMγ.
According to the lemma 2, it is straightforward that

PtrD
Rtr
N
X
n=1
Itail
n (βℓ, βu)
∂βℓ∂βu
−Itail
n (βℓ, βu)
∂βℓ∂βu

(46)
≤k2N(N + 1)(N + 4
√
3 −1)PtrD
24Rtr
· ∥β∥,
(47)
Let o(βℓ, βu) = PN
n=1[Itail
n (βℓ, βu) + Ihead
n
(βℓ, βu)]Eloc(n), it
follows (41) that

∂o(βℓ, βu)
∂βℓ∂βu
−∂o(βℓ, βu)
∂βℓ∂βu

≤
N
X
n=1
2k2(n2 −n
8
+
√
3n
3
)Eloc(n) · ∥β∥
≤k2N(N + 1)(N + 4
√
3 −1)
12
Eloc(N) · ∥β∥.
(48)
Since the fenergy contains the term in both (46) and (48) and
the Lipschitz constant can be generalized to all M events,
fenergy’s gradient follows
∇fenergy(βℓ, βu) −∇fenergy(βℓ, βu)

≤Mk2N(N + 1)(N + 4
√
3 −1)
12

Eloc(N) + PtrD
2Rtr

∥β∥.
(49)
According
to
the
definition
of
weakly
convexity
and
smoothness,
fenergy(βℓ, βu)
is
proved
to
have
its
gra-
dient
Lipschitz
continuous
with
the
Lipschitz
constant
2Mγ

Eloc(N) + PtrD
2Rtr

. Proof of Lemma 3 is completed.
APPENDIX C
PROOF OF LEMMA 4
Given β =
βℓ−βℓ
βu −βu

, since both objective and constraint
functions are proved to follow continuous Lipschitz gradient
in previous two Lemmas. According to Lemma 1.2.3 from
Nesterov’s work [41], it is straightforward to prove:
facc(βℓ, βu) −facc(βℓ, βu) −

∇fmiss(βℓ, βu), β
 ≤γ
2 ∥β∥2 ,
(50)
and
v(βℓ, βu) −v(βℓ, βu) −

∇v(βℓ, βu), β
 ≤DMγ ∥β∥2 , (51)
fenergy(βℓ, βu) −fenergy(βℓ, βu) −

∇fenergy(βℓ, βu), β

≤Mγ

Eloc(N) + PtrD
2Rtr

∥β∥2 .
(52)
Hence, (50) indicates that facc(βℓ,βu) is both γ-smooth and γ-
weakly convex. (51) and (52) implies that v(βℓ, βu) is both
2DMγ-smooth and 2DMγ-weakly convex, fenergy(βℓ, βu) ex-
hibits 2Mγ

Eloc(N) + PtrD
2Rtr

weak convexity and smooth-
ness. Proof of Lemma 4 is completed.
APPENDIX D
PROOF OF PROPOSITION 1
Given β =

βℓ−βℓ
βu −βu

. Since facc(βℓ, βu) has proved its
weakly convexity, Poff follows that:
Poff(βℓ, βu) ≥Poff(βℓ, βu) +

∇Poff(βℓ, βu), β

−γ ∥β∥2 .
(53)
Based on (53) and the fact that κ
2 (max{0, Poff(βℓ, βu)})2 is
still weakly convex, it is straightforward to derive:
κ
2 (Poff(βℓ, βu))2
≥κ
2 Poff(βℓ, βu))2 + κPoff(βℓ, βu) ·
 Poff(βℓ, βu) −Poff(βℓ, βu)

≥κ
2 Poff(βℓ, βu))2 + κPoff(βℓ, βu) ·
 
∇Poff(βℓ, βu), β

−γ ∥β∥2
.
(54)
Let x = (βℓ, βu) and y = (βℓ, βu) for simplicity. Therefore, it
is straightforward to show
κ
2 (Poff(x))2−κ
2 Poff(y))2 ≥κPoff(y)·⟨∇Poff(y), β⟩−κAγ ∥β∥2 ,
(55)
By applying the triangle inequality and using the smoothness
of Poff(βℓ, βu), the gradient of κ
2 (Poff (βℓ, βu))2 is Lipschitz
continuous as
∇∥κ
2 (Poff(x))2 −κ
2 (Poff(y))2∥
= κ∥Poff(x)∇Poff(x) −Poff(y)∇Poff(y)∥
= κ (|Poff(x) −Poff(y)|∥∇Poff(x)∥)
+ κ (|Poff(y)|∥∇Poff(x) −∇Poff(y)∥)
(56)
Since ∥∇Poff(x) −∇Poff(y)∥≤2γ ∥β∥2, it follows that
∥∇κ
2 (Poff(x)2 −∇κ
2 Poff(y)2∥≤κA(A + 2γ)∥x −y∥, (57)
For both (55) and (57), A corresponds to the constant that
A ≥max {|Poff(βℓ, βu)| , ∥∇Poff(βℓ, βu)∥}
= max

θ, DM(N −1)
2
√
2

.
(58)
In this case,
κ
2 (Poff(x))2 is proved as a 2κγA weakly
convex
and
κA (A + 2γ)
smooth
function.
Since
v(βℓ, βu)
=
DMPoff(βℓ, βu), it is straightforward that
κ
2 (max{0, v(βℓ, βu)})2
is
a
2κDMγA
weakly
convex
and κDMA (A + 2γ) smooth function. Given the proved
fact
that
fenergy(βℓ, βu)
exhibits
2Mγ

Eloc(N) + PtrD
2Rtr

weak
convexity
and
smoothness
from
(52),
similar
mathematical derivation can done according to (55) and
(57).
In
this
case,
ρ
2 (max{0, fenergy(βℓ, βu)})2
exhibits
ρB

B + 2Mγ

Eloc(N) + PtrD
2Rtr

smoothness
and
2MγρB

Eloc(N) + PtrD
2Rtr

weak
convexity.
Specifically,
13
the Lipschitz constant is 2ρB when B is chosen to satisfy:
B ≥max {|fenergy(βℓ, βu)| , ∥∇fenergy(βℓ, βu)∥}
= max

ξ, (N 2 + 1)Eloc(N)
2
√
2
+ (N + 2)(N −1)PtrD
4
√
2Rtr

.
(59)
Proof of Proposition 1 is completed.
REFERENCES
[1] F. Liu, Y. Cui, C. Masouros, J. Xu, T. X. Han, Y. C. Eldar, and S. Buzzi,
“Integrated sensing and communications: Toward dual-functional wire-
less networks for 6g and beyond,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 40,
no. 6, pp. 1728–1767, 2022.
[2] Q. Zeng, Z. Wang, Y. Zhou, H. Wu, L. Yang, and K. Huang,
“Knowledge-based
ultra-low-latency
semantic
communications
for
robotic edge intelligence,” IEEE Trans. Commun., 2024.
[3] Z. Wang, K. Huang, and Y. C. Eldar, “Spectrum breathing: Protecting
over-the-air federated learning against interference,” IEEE Trans. Wire-
less Commun., 2024.
[4] E. Li, L. Zeng, Z. Zhou, and X. Chen, “Edge ai: On-demand acceler-
ating deep neural network inference via edge computing,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 447–457, 2019.
[5] J. Yan, S. Bi, and Y.-J. A. Zhang, “Optimal model placement and online
model splitting for device-edge co-inference,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 8354–8367, 2022.
[6] Z. Wang, A. E. Kalør, Y. Zhou, P. Popovski, and K. Huang, “Ultra-
low-latency edge inference for distributed sensing,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.13360, 2024.
[7] J. Lee, H. Lee, and W. Choi, “Wireless channel adaptive dnn split
inference for resource-constrained edge devices,” IEEE Commun. Lett.,
vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 1520–1524, 2023.
[8] J. Shao and J. Zhang, “Bottlenet++: An end-to-end approach for feature
compression in device-edge co-inference systems,” in IEEE Int. Conf.
on Commun. Workshops (ICC Workshops).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–6.
[9] M. Jankowski, D. G¨und¨uz, and K. Mikolajczyk, “Joint device-edge
inference over wireless links with pruning,” in IEEE Int. Workshop
Signal Process. Adv. Wireless Commun. (SPAWC).
IEEE, 2020, pp.
1–5.
[10] D. Wen, P. Liu, G. Zhu, Y. Shi, J. Xu, Y. C. Eldar, and S. Cui, “Task-
oriented sensing, computation, and communication integration for multi-
device edge ai,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., 2023.
[11] D. Wen, X. Jiao, P. Liu, G. Zhu, Y. Shi, and K. Huang, “Task-oriented
over-the-air computation for multi-device edge ai,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., 2023.
[12] Z. Liu, Q. Lan, and K. Huang, “Resource allocation for multiuser edge
inference with batching and early exiting,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun.,
vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 1186–1200, 2023.
[13] Y. Mao, C. You, J. Zhang, K. Huang, and K. B. Letaief, “A survey
on mobile edge computing: The communication perspective,” IEEE
Commun. Surv. Tut, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 2322–2358, 2017.
[14] J. Yan, S. Bi, Y. J. Zhang, and M. Tao, “Optimal task offloading
and resource allocation in mobile-edge computing with inter-user task
dependency,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 235–
250, 2019.
[15] C. You, Y. Zeng, R. Zhang, and K. Huang, “Asynchronous mobile-edge
computation offloading: Energy-efficient resource management,” IEEE
Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 7590–7605, 2018.
[16] C. Ding, J.-B. Wang, H. Zhang, M. Lin, and G. Y. Li, “Joint optimization
of transmission and computation resources for satellite and high altitude
platform assisted edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1362–1377, 2021.
[17] Y. Wang, M. Sheng, X. Wang, L. Wang, and J. Li, “Mobile-edge com-
puting: Partial computation offloading using dynamic voltage scaling,”
IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 10, pp. 4268–4282, 2016.
[18] Y. Mao, J. Zhang, and K. B. Letaief, “Dynamic computation offloading
for mobile-edge computing with energy harvesting devices,” IEEE J.
Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 34, no. 12, pp. 3590–3605, 2016.
[19] Q. Hu, Y. Cai, G. Yu, Z. Qin, M. Zhao, and G. Y. Li, “Joint offloading
and trajectory design for uav-enabled mobile edge computing systems,”
IEEE Int. Things J., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 1879–1892, 2018.
[20] A. Asheralieva and D. Niyato, “Fast and secure computational offload-
ing with lagrange coded mobile edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vol. 70, no. 5, pp. 4924–4942, 2021.
[21] X. Cao, F. Wang, J. Xu, R. Zhang, and S. Cui, “Joint computation and
communication cooperation for energy-efficient mobile edge comput-
ing,” IEEE Int. Things J., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4188–4200, 2018.
[22] L. Liu and W. Yu, “Massive connectivity with massive mimo—part i:
Device activity detection and channel estimation,” IEEE Trans. Signal
Process., vol. 66, no. 11, pp. 2933–2946, 2018.
[23] Z. Qin, J. Fan, Y. Liu, Y. Gao, and G. Y. Li, “Sparse representation
for wireless communications: A compressive sensing approach,” IEEE
Signal Process. Mag., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 40–58, 2018.
[24] L. Liu, E. G. Larsson, W. Yu, P. Popovski, C. Stefanovic, and E. De Car-
valho, “Sparse signal processing for grant-free massive connectivity: A
future paradigm for random access protocols in the internet of things,”
IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 88–99, 2018.
[25] F. Peng, Z. Jiang, S. Zhou, Z. Niu, and S. Zhang, “Sensing and
communication co-design for status update in multiaccess wireless
networks,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., 2021.
[26] M. V. Ngo, T. Luo, and T. Q. Quek, “Adaptive anomaly detection for
internet of things in hierarchical edge computing: A contextual-bandit
approach,” ACM Trans. Int. of Things, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–23, 2021.
[27] E. W. Dereszynski and T. G. Dietterich, “Spatiotemporal models for
data-anomaly detection in dynamic environmental monitoring cam-
paigns,” ACM Trans. Sensor Netw. (TOSN), vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1–36,
2011.
[28] G. Zhu, Z. Lyu, X. Jiao, P. Liu, M. Chen, J. Xu, S. Cui, and P. Zhang,
“Pushing ai to wireless network edge: An overview on integrated
sensing, communication, and computation towards 6g,” Science China
Inf. Sciences, vol. 66, no. 3, p. 130301, 2023.
[29] M. Bojarski, D. Del Testa, D. Dworakowski, B. Firner, B. Flepp,
P. Goyal, L. D. Jackel, M. Monfort, U. Muller, J. Zhang et al., “End
to end learning for self-driving cars,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.07316,
2016.
[30] S. Teerapittayanon, B. McDanel, and H.-T. Kung, “Branchynet: Fast
inference via early exiting from deep neural networks,” in Int. Conf.
Pattern Recognit. (ICPR).
IEEE, 2016, pp. 2464–2469.
[31] N. Ma, X. Zhang, H.-T. Zheng, and J. Sun, “Shufflenet v2: Practical
guidelines for efficient cnn architecture design,” in Proc. of the Eur.
Conf. Comput. Vision (ECCV), 2018, pp. 116–131.
[32] M. Sandler, A. Howard, M. Zhu, A. Zhmoginov, and L.-C. Chen, “Mo-
bilenetv2: Inverted residuals and linear bottlenecks,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Conf. Comput. Vision Pattern Recogn.(CVPR), 2018, pp. 4510–4520.
[33] Y. Zhang, B. Kang, B. Hooi, S. Yan, and J. Feng, “Deep long-tailed
learning: A survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.04596, 2021.
[34] D. Gao, M. Madden, D. Chambers, and G. Lyons, “Bayesian ann
classifier for ecg arrhythmia diagnostic system: A comparison study,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., vol. 4.
IEEE, 2005, pp.
2383–2388.
[35] Z. Zhang and M. Tao, “Learning-based branch-and-bound for non-
convex complex modulus constrained problems with applications in
wireless communications,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 21,
no. 6, pp. 3752–3763, 2021.
[36] X. Tan, H. Li, L. Wang, X. Huang, and Z. Xu, “Empowering adaptive
early-exit inference with latency awareness,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell., vol. 35, no. 11, 2021, pp. 9825–9833.
[37] Q. Lin, R. Ma, and Y. Xu, “Complexity of an inexact proximal-
point penalty method for constrained smooth non-convex optimization,”
Computational optimization and applications, vol. 82, no. 1, pp. 175–
224, 2022.
[38] Y. You, Z. Zhang, C.-J. Hsieh, J. Demmel, and K. Keutzer, “Imagenet
training in minutes,” in Proc. of the 47th Int. Conf. on Parallel Process.,
2018, pp. 1–10.
[39] E. Korot, Z. Guan, D. Ferraz, S. K. Wagner, G. Zhang, X. Liu, L. Faes,
N. Pontikos, S. G. Finlayson, H. Khalid et al., “Code-free deep learning
for multi-modality medical image classification,” Nature Machine Intell.,
vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 288–298, 2021.
[40] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classification
with deep convolutional neural networks,” Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.
(NIPS), vol. 25, 2012.
[41] Y. Nesterov et al., Lectures on convex optimization.
Springer, 2018,
vol. 137.
