IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
1
Fine-Grained AI Model Caching and Downloading
With Coordinated Multipoint Broadcasting
in Multi-Cell Edge Networks
Yang Fu, Peng Qin, Member, IEEE, Yueyue Zhang, Pao Cheng, Jun Lu, and Yifei Wang
Abstract—6G networks are envisioned to support on-demand
AI model downloading to accommodate diverse inference re-
quirements of end users. By proactively caching models at
edge nodes, users can retrieve the requested models with low
latency for on-device AI inference. However, the substantial
size of contemporary AI models poses significant challenges
for edge caching under limited storage capacity, as well as for
the concurrent delivery of heterogeneous models over wireless
channels. To address these challenges, we propose a fine-grained
AI model caching and downloading system that exploits param-
eter reusability, stemming from the common practice of fine-
tuning task-specific models from a shared pre-trained model
with frozen parameters. This system selectively caches model
parameter blocks (PBs) at edge nodes, eliminating redundant
storage of reusable parameters across different cached models.
Additionally, it incorporates coordinated multipoint (CoMP)
broadcasting to simultaneously deliver reusable PBs to multiple
users, thereby enhancing downlink spectrum utilization. Under
this arrangement, we formulate a model downloading delay
minimization problem to jointly optimize PB caching, migration
(among edge nodes), and broadcasting beamforming. To tackle
this intractable problem, we develop a distributed multi-agent
learning framework that enables edge nodes to explicitly learn
mutual influence among their actions, thereby facilitating coop-
eration. Furthermore, a data augmentation approach is proposed
to adaptively generate synthetic training samples through a pre-
dictive model, boosting sample efficiency and accelerating policy
learning. Both theoretical analysis and simulation experiments
validate the superior convergence performance of the proposed
learning framework. Moreover, experimental results demonstrate
that our scheme significantly reduces model downloading delay
compared to benchmark methods.
Index Terms—Edge AI, model downloading, edge caching,
CoMP broadcasting, multi-agent learning.
I. INTRODUCTION
A. Background
T
HE rapid proliferation of edge computing resources,
coupled with transformative breakthroughs in artificial
intelligence (AI), has given rise to edge AI [1]. As a piv-
otal enabler of 6G networks, edge AI supports ubiquitous
inference services through the distributed deployment of AI
models across edge infrastructure and user devices [2], [3].
This
work
was
supported
in
part
by
62201212,
62271201,
2023YFB2904700, and MPIS202409. (Corresponding author: Peng Qin)
Yang Fu, Peng Qin, Yifei Wang are with the State Key Laboratory of
Alternate Electrical Power System with Renewable Energy Sources, School of
Electrical and Electronic Engineering, North China Electric Power University,
Beijing 102206, China (e-mail: qinpeng@ncepu.edu.cn).
Yueyue Zhang is with the China Satellite Network Group Shanghai Re-
search Institute, Shanghai 200131, China.
For inference tasks characterized by high data sensitivity and
stringent privacy requirements, such as mobile health and
virtual assistants, on-device AI inference is often mandatory to
preserve all data at the user side [4]. However, the substantial
storage demands of contemporary AI models (e.g., Apple’s
on-device large language model (LLM) OpenELM, which
comprises 3 billion parameters and requires 12 GB of storage)
render it impractical for user devices with limited capacity
to store all necessary models locally [5]. A viable solution
is to adaptively download AI models from the network1,
accommodating real-time and diverse inference needs while
preventing excessive local storage consumption.
Indeed, on-demand model downloading from an AI reposi-
tory (which comprises a large collection of trained models and
is typically deployed in cloud centers) has been identified as a
key use case in the standardization of 6G [6], [7]. According
to 3GPP technical specifications, such downloading operations
should be completed within seconds for general inference
tasks, and within 10-100 ms for time-sensitive applications
including humanoid robot control and autonomous driving [7],
[8]. To satisfy these stringent delay requirements, caching AI
models at edge nodes near users is essential for eliminating the
unpredictable delays inherent in cloud access [9]. Meanwhile,
advanced wireless transmission techniques (particularly broad-
casting and coordinated multipoint (CoMP) considered in this
paper) should be exploited to boost downlink throughput,
thereby accelerating model delivery from edge nodes to end
users. Building upon these two directions, research efforts
have been dedicated to facilitating AI model caching and
downloading in edge networks.
B. Related Works
1) Works on Edge AI Model Caching: Given the limited
storage capacity of edge nodes, only a finite number of AI
models can be cached from the AI repository. Therefore,
existing works primarily focus on developing optimal model
selection strategies at edge nodes to align with user requests.
Literature [10] investigated a single edge node scenario, where
a subset of AI models was cached by the edge node to execute
inference tasks. The authors proposed a deep reinforcement
1Accomplishing AI inference through task offloading to edge/cloud servers
and downloading models to local devices represent two complementary rather
than substitutable paradigms. This work focuses on the latter, motivated
by its advantages in stable low-latency inference without repeated network
dependency, enhanced data security, improved location and context awareness,
and stronger sustainability for continuous tasks.
arXiv:2509.19341v2  [cs.NI]  6 Oct 2025
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
2
learning (DRL)-based approach to train the caching policy
while introducing penalty mechanism to avoid frequent model
change. Paper [11] jointly optimized the number and type of
AI models to be cached at an edge node, so as to provide
scalable inference service. A rounding and relocation method
was developed to handle the integer constraints of caching
variables, thereby minimizing the holistic cost and accuracy
loss. The authors of [12], [13] elaborated the cooperative
caching in multi-cell scenarios, in which AI models could be
migrated among edge nodes to enhance the cache hit ratio.
Multi-agent DRL (MADRL) was adopted to make distributed
caching decisions, while promoting model routing via back-
haul links. In [14], different compressed versions of an AI
model were deployed at cloud-edge-device nodes according to
their computational capacities. The authors developed a DRL
algorithm integrated with numerical optimization to derive
the task offloading and resource allocation solution, thereby
balancing inference delay, energy consumption, and accuracy
loss. However, the aforementioned studies follow conventional
principles of content caching, which directly stores entire AI
models at edge nodes. Given that AI models typically require
significantly greater storage space than traditional cached
content, such coarse-grained caching methods are inefficient
in utilizing the limited edge storage capacity.
Some works proposed storage-efficient caching strategies by
exploiting the architectural properties of AI models, particu-
larly deep neural networks. Layer splitting was considered in
[15] to determine the number of model layers to be cached
at each edge node, then nodes storing different layers se-
quentially execute inference tasks through intermediate result
exchange. Paper [16] employed semantic splitting to partition
the AI model into parallel disjoint fragments. Online learning
was adopted to cache model fragments at different edge nodes,
thereby reducing energy consumption and response time. Nev-
ertheless, the methods proposed in [15], [16] are limited to
caching a single AI model with a specific architecture. They
cannot scale to the concurrent deployment of a large number
of heterogeneous models from the AI repository, failing to
meet diverse model downloading demands. To fill this gap,
our work exploits not only the internal structure of individual
AI models to partition them into fine-grained parameter sets,
but also the interplay among different models by identifying
their overlapping parameters for scalable edge caching.
2) Works on Broadcasting and CoMP: By leveraging the
broadcast nature of wireless channels, edge node can simul-
taneously deliver identical data to multiple users, thereby
improving spectral efficiency. To mitigate inter-cell inter-
ference, multiple nodes can further form a CoMP cluster
for joint data transmission, which effectively enhances the
downlink throughput [17]. Reference [18] investigated the
hybrid beamforming in a CoMP broadcasting scenario, in
which the optimal precoder was derived by semi-definite
program, then a maximum ratio combiner was employed to
maximize the received signal power. In [19], a two-stage
optimization approach was designed to maximize the quality
of service (QoS) of data broadcasting, in which cells were
first clustered to reduce inter-cell interference, then the service
order was scheduled to decrease the total data reception delay.
The authors of [20] considered an air-ground communication
system where multiple drones broadcast data to user groups
using CoMP. To perform system optimization, QMIX was
invoked to output the drone flight direction, then the CoMP
beamforming was optimized using majorization minimization
algorithm. Literature [21] elaborated a multi-cell integrated
sensing and communication system with CoMP, where the
inter-cell reflections could be utilized to enhance the target es-
timation performance owing to the sharing of edge nodes’ data.
The authors proposed robust CoMP beamforming approach
taking into account imperfect channel state information (CSI).
In the context of edge AI, broadcasting has been employed to
distribute inference tokens across devices, enabling the parallel
execution of mixture-of-experts foundation models [22]. In
[23], user-offloaded tasks are jointly processed by multiple
edge nodes that form a CoMP cluster for data exchange and
result delivery, where the success probability is maximized
to enhance both communication and computation efficiency.
Although existing studies have demonstrated the effectiveness
of broadcasting and CoMP techniques for enhancing data
rates, their seamless integration with AI model downloading
remains an open issue. Unlike traditional multimedia content,
AI models are often trained for various downstream tasks,
leading to low information overlap among user requests. Fur-
thermore, the above works assume that all user data is readily
available at edge nodes to enable CoMP, while overlooking
the data exchange overhead. For AI models with large data
volumes, excessive migration among edge nodes may incur
severe downloading delays and backhaul congestion.
C. Motivations and Contributions
To address the limitations of previous studies, we pro-
pose a novel fine-grained AI model caching and download-
ing (FGAMCD) system that exploits parameter reusability
among AI models. This property arises from the common
practice of fine-tuning task-specific models from a shared
pre-trained model, inherently maintaining a set of reusable
parameters across different AI models [24], [25]. For instance,
in convolutional neural networks (CNNs), the shallow layers
responsible for extracting common visual features typically
exhibit high parameter reusability across different tasks. This
effect is even more pronounced in emerging LLMs, where
parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) techniques (e.g., low-
rank adaptation) typically freeze over 99% of pre-trained
parameters, resulting in a significant proportion of reused
parameters [26].
In the proposed FGAMCD system, edge nodes selectively
cache parameter blocks (PBs), which are fine-grained com-
ponents of AI models, such as neural network layers or
Transformer blocks. When multiple AI models are cached, the
edge node only needs to store a single copy of their reusable
PBs, thereby enhancing storage utilization. Additionally, it in-
tegrates broadcasting to simultaneously deliver PBs to multiple
users, leveraging potential PB reuse across different requested
models. To further reduce the downloading delay, FGAMCD
optimizes PB migration within the backhaul network, facili-
tating the CoMP transmission of edge nodes while balancing
coordinated gains and data exchange overhead.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
3
Parameter reusability has also been explored in prior works
to support AI model caching and delivery. The TrimCaching
framework proposed in [27] optimizes edge caching of AI
models by considering parameter sharing among models,
thereby improving cache hit ratio. However, this approach
orthogonally allocates downlink spectrum to each user and
relies on traditional unicasting for model delivery, leaving
room for downloading delay reduction. Moreover, the pro-
posed heuristic caching method incurs high computational
complexity, limiting its adaptability to dynamic user requests
and communication conditions. Work in [28] developed a
model broadcasting protocol to serve multiple users per-
forming heterogeneous inference tasks, along with the joint
optimization of parameter selection and power control. Al-
though this protocol incorporates broadcasting of reused PBs,
the proposed approach cannot be directly extended to multi-
cell and multi-antenna communication systems, which re-
quire dedicated PB migration and beamforming design. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to jointly
optimize AI model caching, migration, and delivery in multi-
cell edge networks, through a backhaul-wireless co-design
for communication-efficient model downloading. In partic-
ular, the combination of caching-aware PB migration with
CoMP broadcasting unleashes the full potential of parameter
reusability, offering simultaneous improvements in storage and
spectrum efficiency, which remain only partially addressed in
[27], [28]. The main contributions are summarized below.
1) We propose an FGAMCD system to fulfill diverse down-
loading requests by strategically caching PBs from an AI
model repository across multiple edge nodes, enabling
efficient model retrieval for end users. Subsequently,
the edge nodes cooperatively deliver the cached PBs
to users through CoMP broadcasting, while PBs are
migrated within backhaul links to facilitate coordinated
transmission and enhance downlink rates. After receiv-
ing all the required PBs, each user reconstructs the
complete model to perform on-device AI inference. With
the objective to minimize the total model downloading
delay, we formulate a joint optimization problem of
PB caching, migration, and broadcasting beamforming,
subject to user QoS requirements, edge storage capacity
and transmission power constraints.
2) The formulated problem is an intractable mixed-integer
nonlinear programming (MINLP) problem, exacerbated
by the substantial computational complexity of central-
ized control across multiple edge nodes. To solve this
problem, we develop a distributed MADRL framework,
named multi-agent action semantics network with data
augmentation (MAASN-DA), which learns PB caching
and migration policies by explicitly characterizing the
influence of each edge node’s action on others through
a specialized actor network. In addition, MAASN-DA
adaptively generates synthetic training samples through
a predictive model to enrich the experience replay
buffer, thereby accelerating policy learning. A robust
optimization subroutine for deriving CoMP broadcast-
ing beamformers under imperfect CSI is proposed and
Fig. 1. Fine-grained AI model caching and downloading system model.
incorporated into the reward calculation, thus completing
the MAASN-DA training loop.
3) We provide a theoretical convergence analysis for
MAASN-DA, deriving a closed-form upper bound on
the Q-value approximation error to offer theoretical
guidelines for learning hyperparameter configuration.
Furthermore, extensive experiments utilizing real-world
dataset and AI models are conducted. The ablation study
demonstrates that the proposed MAASN-DA achieves
higher cumulative reward and faster convergence speed
than existing MADRL methods. Moreover, experimental
results reveal a two-fold performance gain achieved by
the FGAMCD system: i) caching efficiency gain by
eliminating redundant storage of reusable PBs, and ii)
downloading efficiency gain through coordinated PB
broadcasting that simultaneously serves multiple user
requests. Compared with conventional coarse-grained
caching and unicasting-based model delivery, FGAMCD
reduces model downloading delay by 29.74% to 67.86%.
Notations: Superscripts H and T denote the conjugate
transpose and transpose, respectively. ∥· ∥indicates the norm
of a vector or spectral norm of a matrix. CM×N specifies the
space of M × N complex matrices, and R is the set of real
numbers. {x}+ is equal to max{x, 0}. X ⪰0 means that X
is a semi-definite matrix. O denotes the all-zero matrix.
II. SYSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM FORMULATION
We consider a multi-cell network architecture as illustrated
in Fig. 1, designed to cache popular AI models2 across N
distributed edge nodes, which then provide model download-
ing service to U end users. The sets of edge nodes and
users are signified by N
= {1, . . . , n, . . . , N} and U =
{1, . . . , u, . . . , U}, respectively. The cloud center maintains a
comprehensive AI model repository J = {1, . . . , j, . . . , J}
comprising J models, which can be downloaded by users to
2To mitigate the risk of sensitive information leakage or adversarial attacks
arising from model distribution across edge nodes, the proposed FGAMCD
framework can be integrated with ownership protection mechanisms such as
model watermarking [29]. In this case, each edge-cached model is embedded
with a watermark (e.g., a binary vector derived from model parameters),
enabling users to verify the authenticity of the downloaded model.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
4
TABLE I
SUMMARY OF MAIN NOTATIONS
Notation
Description
N, N
Number and set of edge nodes
U, U
Number and set of users
J, J
Number and set of AI models
K, K
Number and set of PBs
ru
Target AI model of user u
Kj
Set of PBs that constitute AI model j
an (k)
Binary variable indicating whether node n caches PB k
S (k)
Data size of PB k
Cn
Storage capacity of node n
bn,m (k)
Binary variable indicating whether to migrate PB k from
edge node n to m
λn (k)
Binary indicator representing whether edge node n par-
ticipates in the delivery of PB k
M
Number of antennas at each edge node
hn,u(k)
Actual channel between node n and user u for PB k
˜hn,u(k)
Estimated channel between node n and user u for PB k
wn (k)
Beamforming at edge node n for broadcasting PB k
Ru (k), Qu
Downloading rate and QoS requirement for user u
Rbac
n,m (k)
Backhaul link rate between edge node n and m
T(k), T
Downloading delay for PB k and total downloading delay
on(k), s (k)
Observation of agent n and global state in step k
dn(k), r(k)
Action of agent n and reward in step k
ηin, ηre, ηout
Weighting parameters of ESN
q (k)
Reservoir state of ESN in step k
ξ, τ0
Selection threshold and proportion for synthetic samples
φn
Parameters of agent n’s action semantics actor network
θn, θmix
Parameters of agent n’s critic and mixing network
γ, E
Discount factor and number of training episodes
facilitate on-device AI inference. All edge nodes are intercon-
nected with the cloud server via backhaul links. Main notations
to be used are summarized in Table I. The system operation
encompasses the following phases:
• User Model Request: Each user u submits a model
request to its associated edge nodes, specifying both the
target AI model ru ∈J from the repository and the cor-
responding QoS requirement Qu for model downloading.
• Fine-Grained AI Model Caching: Edge nodes strate-
gically cache a selected set of AI models from the
cloud center, enabling collaborative fulfillment of user
requests. Particularly, the proposed system exploits the
parameter shareability, where distinct AI models may
contain reusable PBs due to the prevalent adoption of
parameter-efficient fine-tuning techniques. Accordingly, a
fine-grained model caching mechanism is implemented to
cache specific PBs instead of entire AI models at each
edge node. This design ensures that the reusable PB is
stored only once in the edge cache, thereby significantly
enhancing storage efficiency. More details will be elabo-
rated in Section II-A.
• Model Downloading With CoMP Broadcasting: Dur-
ing this phase, users retrieve the requested AI models
from edge nodes through a coordinated transmission
process. Specifically, edge nodes utilize backhaul links
to exchange their cached PBs, promoting the execution
of CoMP techniques. Subsequently, they cooperatively
broadcast PBs to the requesting users, exploiting potential
PB reuse across different requested models to improve
downloading efficiency. We will detail the model down-
loading phase in Section II-B to D.
• On-Device AI inference: End users reconstruct AI mod-
Fig. 2. Identification of PBs across AI model architectures.
els from the received PBs to perform various inference
tasks, e.g., text generation for virtual assistance applica-
tions and object recognition for humanoid robot control3.
This local inference fashion inherently guarantees data
privacy and security by eliminating the need for sensitive
data/feature uploading.
A. Fine-Grained AI Model Caching
For each AI model j in the repository, we define Kj as
the set of PBs that constitute the model. K = S
j∈J Kj =
{1, . . . , k, . . . , K} is the collection of all PBs4, and we have
|K| ≤P
j∈J |Kj| due to the parameter shareability. The fine-
grained caching decision is represented by binary variable
an (k) ∈{0, 1}, where an (k) = 1 if PB k is cached by edge
node n, otherwise an (k) = 0. Therefore, Q
k∈Kj an (k) = 1
implies that model j is completely cached by node n. Consider
that the total cached PBs cannot exceed the storage capacity
of each edge node, we have constraint5
X
k∈K
an (k) S (k) ≤Cn, ∀n,
(1)
where S (k) is the size of PB k, Cn signifies the storage
capacity of node n.
Remark 1 (Identification of PBs Across AI Model Archi-
tectures): The definition of a PB depends on the underly-
ing model architecture and parameter reuse conditions. As
illustrated in Fig. 2, in CNNs, a PB can correspond to a
single layer (e.g., convolution, activation, or linear) or a
block containing residual connections or inception modules.
Reusable PBs are often shallow layers or blocks that capture
generic visual features. For decoder-only LLMs, a PB may
3After downloading, model reconstruction simply loads the PBs into
their designated positions within the model architecture, without requiring
retraining or fine-tuning. The associated overhead is negligible compared
to PB downloading [30]. Moreover, this process does not affect inference
accuracy, as it restores the original model exactly without modifying its
architecture or parameter values.
4The integration of FGAMCD with model compression is straightforward.
Diverse sub-models can be derived from an original model through techniques
such as quantization, pruning, and knowledge distillation [6]. The PBs of these
sub-models can be also incorporated into K without affecting our subsequent
modeling and solution, thereby allowing users to flexibly select appropriate
model versions to improve downloading efficiency.
5In practice, each edge node maintains an index table of PB identifiers,
sizes, and locations to support lookup according to user requests. Since such
information requires only minimal storage and thus negligible compared to
cached PBs themselves, the indexing overhead is omitted [10], [11].
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
5
refer to the input embedding, a Transformer decoder layer, or
the output projection (which typically shares parameters with
the embedding). In this case, reusable PBs are usually the
embedding/output layers and the initial decoder layers that
extract common linguistic knowledge. In foundation models
with PEFT, the backbone network itself can serve as a reusable
PB across different downstream tasks, while the inserted fine-
tuning parameters (e.g., low-rank adapters or prefix vectors)
are treated as task-specific PBs. For models without clear
parameter sharing, we directly treat them as individual PBs.
B. Parameter Block Migration
Prior to model delivery over the wireless edge network, edge
nodes can exchange the cached PBs via backhaul links. This
exchange enables multiple nodes to cooperatively transmit PBs
to users, thereby enhancing the CoMP performance at the
expense of increased backhaul delay. To achieve an optimal
tradeoff, we introduce PB migration variable bn,m (k) ∈
{0, 1}, where bn,m (k) = 1 indicates that PB k cached by
edge node n is migrated to node m ∈N\ {n}, otherwise
bn,m (k) = 0. Obviously, a PB can be migrated from edge
node n to other nodes only when it is cached by node n, thus
we impose the following restraint:
an (k) ≥
max
m∈N\{n} {bn,m (k)} , ∀k, n.
(2)
As a result, edge node n can participate in the delivery of
PB k if at least one condition is met: i) PB k is already in
node n’s cache; ii) PB k is migrated to node n from another
node. Formally, we define binary indicator λn (k) ∈{0, 1}
with λn (k) = 1 implying node n’s participation in the delivery
of PB k, then λn (k) is calculated by
λn (k) = min

an (k) +
X
m∈N\{n}
bm,n (k), 1

.
(3)
Afterwards, λn (k) will be leveraged to formulate the received
signal for users during PB broadcasting.
C. Parameter Block Broadcasting
Each edge node equips with M antennas to deliver PBs to
single-antenna users. Denote hn,u (k) =
q
υd−α
n,u (k)¯hn,u (k)
as the wireless channel from edge node n to user u when
broadcasting PB k, υ is the channel gain at reference distance
of 1 m, dn,u (k) represents the transmission distance, α
indicates the pathloss exponent, and ¯hn,u (k) is the small-scale
fading component. In practice, edge nodes face challenges in
acquiring perfect CSI. Hence, we model the relationship be-
tween actual channel hn,u (k) and estimated channel ˜hn,u (k)
considering CSI uncertainty as follows
hn,u (k) = ˜hn,u (k) + en,u (k) ,
en,u (k) ∈En,u =

e|eHCn,ue ≤1
	
,
(4)
where ˜hn,u (k) ∈CM×1 denotes the estimated channel vector,
which can be acquired either through pilot signal reception
from the user or generated by a diffusion model [31]. This
novel approach in [31] exploits the user location as conditional
input and infers the statistical CSI from random noise via
a reverse denoising process. en,u (k) represents the channel
estimation error, which is restricted within a spherical set with
Cn,u determining the shape and size of the spherical set.
PBs are sequentially broadcasted from edge nodes to users
through CoMP transmission. Consider the broadcasting of an
arbitrary PB, say PB k, the transmitted symbol of edge node
n is denoted by λn (k) x (k) with E{|x (k)|2} = 1. Then, the
signal received at user u can be written as
yu (k) =
X
n∈N
hH
n,u(k)wn (k) λn (k) x (k) + zu (k) ,
(5)
where wn (k) ∈CM×1 signifies the transmission beamform-
ing at edge node n, zu (k) is the channel noise, which obeys
a complex Gaussian distribution with zero mean and variance
σ2
u. Consequently, the downloading rate for user u during the
broadcasting of PB k is given by
Ru (k)=Blog2
 
1+
P
n∈N λn (k) hH
n,u (k) wn (k)
2
σ2u
!
, (6)
where B is the network bandwidth shared by all edge nodes.
D. Model Downloading Delay
The model downloading delay measures the total time
required for all users to successfully retrieve the PBs necessary
for assembling their requested AI models. Given that all PBs
are delivered sequentially, we first derive the downloading
delay for a specific PB k (with data size S (k)) in the sequel6
T (k) =
X
n∈N
X
m∈N \{n}
bn,m (k) S (k)
Rbac
n,m (k)
+ max
u∈U
I {k ∈Kru} S (k)
min
en,u(k)∈En,u,∀n Ru (k),
(7)
where the first term of the right-hand-side quantifies the
migration delay, and Rbac
n,m (k) denotes the backhaul link rate7
from edge node n to m when delivering PB k. The second
term is the worst case broadcasting delay, where I {x} = 1
if x is true, otherwise I {x} = 0, thus I {k ∈Kru} indicates
whether u is the requesting user for PB k. On this basis, we
express the total model downloading delay as
T =
X
k∈K
T (k).
(8)
E. Problem Formulation
Our objective is to minimize the model downloading de-
lay while satisfying both edge storage capacity constraints
6Similar to [11], [27], we do not account for the model fetching delay from
the cloud to edge nodes for two reasons. First, model placement at the edge
typically occurs at a much longer timescale than user downloading. Once
cached, user requests only trigger PB migration and wireless delivery, which
dominate the downloading delay. Second, our work focuses on users served
by collaborative edge nodes to explore the performance gain of fine-grained
caching, while the traditional cloud-edge-device model delivery lies beyond
the scope of this study.
7Note that Rbac
n,m (k) is finite and varies across different k due to dynamic
backhaul bandwidth availability and congestion conditions, introducing addi-
tional delay for PB migration. Our subsequent goal is to jointly design caching
and migration strategies to minimize the overall downloading latency.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
6
and user QoS requirements, thereby boosting timely on-
device AI inference. The designed variables incorporate fine-
grained model caching a = [an (k) : ∀k, n], PB migration
b = [bn,m (k) : ∀k, n, m], and broadcasting beamforming
w = [wn (k) : ∀k, n]. As a consequence, the optimization
problem is formulated as
P1 : min
a,b,w T,
(9a)
s.t.
min
en,u(k)∈En,u,∀n Ru (k) ≥I {k ∈Kru} Qu, ∀k, u,
(9b)
an (k) ∈{0, 1} , bn,m (k) ∈{0, 1} , ∀k, n, m,
(9c)
∥wn (k)∥2 ≤P max, ∀k, n,
(9d)
(1), (2)
where (9b) ensures that the downloading rate of the requested
PB remains above the user QoS threshold for all potential
channel estimation errors. (9c) indicates that the caching and
migration variables are binary. In (9d), the transmission power
of each edge node is restricted by power budget P max. (1)
and (2) specifies edge storage capacity and PB migration
constraints, respectively.
However, P1 is an intractable MINLP problem exacerbated
by CSI uncertainty, where the number of possible channel
errors is infinite. Besides, the centralized control of PB caching
and migration results in an extensive decision space as well
as significant information exchange overhead, which imposes
substantial computational complexity. To efficiently address
P1, we develop an MADRL-based approach in Section III to
enable collaborative decision-making among edge nodes in a
distributed manner.
III. FINE-GRAINED AI MODEL CACHING AND
DOWNLOADING SOLUTION
In this section, we present the proposed solution for
FGAMCD. First, we analyze the limitations of existing
MADRL methods in addressing P1, and provide an overview
of our designed multi-agent action semantics network with
data augmentation (MAASN-DA) framework, along with its
specialized enhancements. Next, we detail the individual com-
ponents of MAASN-DA framework, followed by the develop-
ment of the overall training algorithm.
A. Overview of MAASN-DA Framework
In P1, each edge node serves as an agent responsible for
determining its caching, migration, and beamforming deci-
sions. Meanwhile, the decisions made by different agents have
mutual influence, and jointly affect the model downloading
delay, which align with the MADRL framework [32]–[34].
For instance, [34] exploited multi-agent deep deterministic
policy gradient (MADDPG) to optimize model partitioning,
tolerance latency, and updating frequency for split federated
learning, thereby coordinating the global model convergence
across multiple edge nodes. However, none of the existing
MADRL methods can be directly applied to solve P1 due
to the following reasons: 1) Implicitly Characterization of
Actions’ Mutual Influence: Existing methods generally employ
Fig. 3. The proposed MAASN-DA framework.
a single black-box neural network to output each agent’s
action, neglecting the fact that different action dimensions
may have distinct impacts on other agents, which is inefficient
for capturing the complex coupling among the caching and
migration policies of multiple edge nodes. 2) Low Sample
Efficiency: MADRL methods suffer from inefficient sample
collection due to the costly agent-environment interactions,
which can significantly impede the training speed and hinder
the model convergence. 3) Multi-Agent Credit Assignment:
MADRL methods often rely on a centralized training stage that
leverages a global critic function to learn distributed policies,
which leads to challenges in fairly evaluating the contributions
of individual agents [35].
To tackle the above limitations, we propose MAASN-DA
framework as depicted in Fig. 3, which incorporates four main
components:
• Dec-POMDP Reformulation: The original P1 is first re-
formulated as a decentralized partially observable Markov
decision process (Dec-POMDP), specifically designed to
enable MADRL agents to make sequential decisions for
PB caching and delivery.
• Action Semantics Actor Network: A specialized actor
network is designed for each agent to explicitly capture
the effects of different action dimensions on other agents
(i.e., action semantics). This network consists of several
sub-modules, each processing distinct parts of the agent’s
observation and producing corresponding action dimen-
sions based on the action semantics.
• Data Augmentation Experience Replay: After col-
lecting experience tuples through interactions with the
environment, we utilize an echo state network (ESN)
to generate additional training samples by leveraging its
prediction capabilities, thereby enriching the replay buffer
and enhancing sample efficiency. Furthermore, both the
quality and quantity of the generated samples are care-
fully controlled to ensure the convergence performance.
• Value Decomposition Critic Network: Each agent em-
ploys a local critic to estimate its individual Q-value,
which is subsequently combined to obtain the global Q-
value via a mixing network. During the training phase,
the global Q-value is decomposed to compute the policy
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
7
gradients of individual agents, thus addressing the credit
assignment problem.
We present detailed elucidation of these components in the
following subsections.
B. Dec-POMDP Reformulation
Dec-POMDP features the distributed decision-makings for
multiple agents (i.e., edge nodes) with partially observations,
which can be defined by (O, S, D, π, r, γ), where O, S, and
D are observation, state, and action space, respectively. In this
work, we optimize the caching and downloading of each PB
sequentially, so the index of PB k corresponds to the time
step in MADRL. In an arbitrary step k, each agent n obtains
an observation on (k) ∈O, which is a part of global state
s (k) ∈S, then takes action dn (k) ∈D based on distributed
policy π. Given reward function r (k) and discount factor γ,
all agents collaborate to learn an optimal π that maximizes the
accumulative discounted reward. We specify these elements in
the sequel.
1) Observation: on (k) can be intuitively divided into two
parts: oown
n
(k) that contains environmental information and
agent n’s own properties, as well as ooth
n,m (k) , m ∈N\ {n}
that represents the observations of agent n on other agents.
They are written as
oown
n
(k) =
h
S (k) , {I {k ∈Kru} : u ∈Un} , ˜Cn (k)
i
, (10a)
ooth
n,m (k) = ϖn,m
×
h
Rbac
n,m (k) , {I {k ∈Kru} : u ∈Um} , ˜Cm (k)
i
, (10b)
on (k) =

oown
n
(k) ,

ooth
n,m (k) : m ∈N\ {n}
	
,
(10c)
where Un denotes the set of users associated with node
n.
˜Cn (k) signifies the remaining storage capacity before
caching PB k with ˜Cn (k + 1) = { ˜Cn (k) −an (k) S (k)}
+
and
˜Cn (1) = Cn. Binary indicator ϖn,m = 1 implies
that the information of node m can be observed by n,
otherwise ϖn,m = 0. Note that ϖn,m is determined by
the distribution of edge nodes and the allowed information
exchange overhead. Moreover, the global state in step k is
s (k) = [on (k) : n ∈N].
2) Action: Theoretically, all optimization variables of P1
a, b, w can be regarded as the agents’ actions. Nonetheless, the
optimality of MADRL degrades and the training complexity
increases with the growth of action dimension. As a remedy,
we propose to decouple the variables into two groups, where
the PB caching and migration are optimized by MADRL, i.e.,
the action of agent n in step k is
dn (k) = [an (k) , {bn,m (k) : m ∈N\ {n}}] ,
(11)
then the high-dimensional beamforming [wn (k) : ∀n] is de-
rived from an optimization subroutine with given joint action
d (k) = [dn (k) : ∀n], which will be detailed in Section III-F.
Accordingly, the distributed policy that maps local observation
to action is expressed as dn (k) = π (on (k)).
3) Reward: According to P1, the reward design targets to
minimize the downloading delay T (k) of each PB k while
meeting the constraints, i.e.,
r (k) =







−T (k) −r1Λ (k) ,
P
u∈U I {k ∈Kru} > 0, P
n∈N λn (k) > 0,
−r2, P
u∈U I {k ∈Kru} > 0, P
n∈N λn (k) = 0,
0, otherwise,
(12)
where r1, r2 > 0 denote penalties for violating the constraints.
To be specific, Λ (k) = 1 if the optimization subroutine returns
an infeasible solution for QoS or transmission power con-
straints, and all agents receive penalty r1, otherwise Λ (k) = 0.
If PB k is requested by some users whereas no agent can
deliver PB k, then agents are punished8 by r2. If PB k is not
required by any users, we set r (k) = 0. Note that the other
constrains in P1 can be ensured by our actor network design.
C. Action Semantics Actor Network
It is observed from (11) that an (k) only affects the agent
n’s own property, i.e., the remaining storage capacity, while
the PB migration bn,m (k) directly impacts the caching and
downloading of other agents. This motivates us to explicitly
extract the action semantics by dividing the black-box actor
network into multiple sub-modules, each processing a distinct
part of the agent’s observation [36]. As shown in Fig. 3, the
actor network of each agent n consists of N sub-modules. The
first one takes the full observation on (k) as input, utilizes two
neural networks to yield observation embedding en (k) and
an (k), respectively. The rest N −1 sub-modules contain N −1
neural networks to generate the action dimensions related with
other influenced agents. Each of the N −1 sub-modules (say
the m-th sub-module) uses a part of observation ooth
n,m (k) as
input to determine embedding en,m (k) related with influenced
agent m, then combines en (k) and en,m (k) via inner product
to output bn,m (k).
Following the above structure, the action semantics actor
network of agent n is represented by π (on (k) ; φn) with
φn being the network parameters. For the sake of satisfying
constraints (1), (2), and (9c), we further adapt the output
layer of π (on (k) ; φn) as below. Given an output value ˜d,
we leverage the Gumbel-Softmax reparameterization to yield
differentiable binary variable as
d = GS

˜d

= Sigmoid
 ˜d + ln ς −ln (1 −ς)
stemp

,
(13)
where Sigmoid (x) =
ex
1+ex , ς is a random variable obeying
uniform distribution within [0, 1], stemp denotes the Softmax
coefficient, and smaller stemp makes d closer to a binary
variable. Therefore, given the variables output by the sub-
modules of π (on (k) ; φn), denoted by ˜an (k) and ˜bn,m (k),
we invoke the following operations:
an (k)=GS (˜an (k)) , bn,m (k)=GS(˜bn,m (k)), ∀m,
(14)
8Two factors may lead to insufficient edge storage capacity for caching a PB
requested by certain users. First, the caching decisions may fail to fully utilize
the available storage, in which case the reward penalty guides the agents to
adjust their policies. Second, the total system resources may be inadequate to
satisfy all user requests, rendering problem P1 mathematically infeasible. In
such situations, users can either defer to the next request period or directly
retrieve the models from the cloud.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
8
In addition, if the edge node’s storage capacity is not adequate
for caching PB k, i.e., ˜Cn (k) < S (k), an (k) is forced to be
0. For an (k) = 0, we set bn,m (k) = 0, m ∈N\ {n} to
prohibit PB migration from node n.9
D. Data Augmentation Experience Replay
In
each
time
step
k,
all
agents
interact
with
the
environment
and
collect
a
new
experience
tuple
(s (k) , d (k) , r (k) , s (k + 1)). In the meantime, we adopt an
ESN to predict the reward and next state (¯r (k) ,¯s (k + 1)),
thereby synthesizing training data and boosting sample
efficiency. The reason for choosing an ESN over other
predictive models, such as recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
or transformers, is that it only requires training the output
weights while keeping the high-dimensional hidden weights
fixed. This significantly reduces training complexity and
mitigate gradient vanishing/exploding issues.
Specifically, ESN consists of input layer, reservoir layer,
and output layer with weighting parameters ηin, ηre, and ηout,
respectively. Taking sequence v (1) , . . . , v (k) as input, where
v (k) = (s (k) , d (k)), ESN recurrently updates the reservoir
states q (1) , . . . , q (k) and yields the prediction output as
follows [37]:
q (k) = tanh (ηinv (k) + ηreq (k −1)) ,
(¯r (k) ,¯s (k + 1)) = ηoutq (k) .
(15)
We fix ηin and ηre after random initialization, and only
update ηout during the tuning of ESN. The loss function to
be minimized is given by
Le (ηout) = ∥ηoutq (k) −(r (k) , s (k + 1))∥2,
(16)
where
real
experience
tuples
from
the
environment
(r (k) , s (k + 1)) , ∀k serve as labels for tuning the ESN.
Considering that the extensive inclusion of synthetic training
samples may degrade the convergence performance, we design
a data generation control strategy to filter out low-quality data
while adaptively adjusting the number of synthetic samples.
Concretely, we invoke the following condition to identify
satisfactory data predicted by ESN:
∥(¯r (k) ,¯s (k + 1)) −(r (k) , s (k + 1))∥≤ξ,
(17)
where ξ denotes the data selection threshold. Moreover, the
ESN can generate at most τ0K synthetic samples per episode
in the initial training stage with τ0 ∈[0, 1] being a tunable
proportion. The number of synthetic samples should decrease
with the training episodes, thus we have
τe =
j
τ0KΛ⌊e/ ¯
E ⌋k
,
(18)
where τe represents the maximum number of synthetic sam-
ples in the e-th episode, Λ ∈(0, 1) is the attenuation fac-
tor, and the number of synthetic samples declines every ¯E
episodes. Thereafter, both real experience tuples and synthetic
samples are stored in the replay buffer.
9It is worth noting that an edge node with fully occupied storage can still
relay PBs received from other nodes to users. This is because such PBs are
only temporarily buffered in volatile memory (e.g., DRAM/VRAM) rather
than persistently cached, and thus do not consume the node’s storage capacity.
E. Value Decomposition Critic Network
The critic network of MAASN-DA is designed based on the
value decomposition architecture, allowing for the evaluation
of each agent’s contribution to the overall system. Each
agent n possesses a local critic Q (on (k) , dn (k) ; θn) with
parameters θn to estimate its Q-value Qn, then a mixing
network is adopted to combine the individual Q-value of each
agent, and produce a global Q-value as
Qtot = gmix  s, Q1, . . . , QN; θmix
,
(19)
where gmix indicates the mixing function, and θmix is the
parameters of the mixing network. Inspired by the well-known
QMIX algorithm [38], we design gmix by forcing monotonicity
between Qtot and each Qn, i.e.,
∂Qtot/∂Qn ≥0, ∀n ∈N,
(20)
such that any action dn (k) that increases the individual Q-
value Qn also improves the global Q-value Qtot. To this end,
the parameter θmix is yielded by separate hypernetworks, each
of which employs an absolute activation function to output
the weights for one layer of the mixing network, thereby
guaranteeing the nonnegativity.
During the training stage, we randomly sample a mini-
batch of samples in the replay buffer, and perform forward
propagation through the neural networks in MAASN-DA to
compute the loss functions. To be specific, the loss for the
value decomposition critic network is given by
Lc  {θn} , θmix
=E

Qtar(k)−Qtot s (k) , d (k) ; {θn}, θmix
,
(21)
where
Qtar(k)=r(k)+γQtot s(k+1),{π(on(k+1); ˆφn)};{ˆθn},ˆθmix
,
ˆφn and ˆθn, ˆθmix are the parameters of the target actor and
critic networks, respectively. These target networks share the
same structure as the main actor and critic networks, while
their parameters are slowly updated to stabilize training.
Additionally, the global Q-value is decomposed to evaluate
the contribution of each agent n, thereby calculating its actor
loss as follows:
La (φn) = E [−Q (on (k) , π (on (k) ; φn) ; θn)] , ∀n.
(22)
Consequently, the actor and critic networks of MAASN-
DA are updated using gradient descent based on the above
loss functions.
F. Robust CoMP Beamforming Subroutine
To proceed with, we propose a robust CoMP beamform-
ing subroutine to optimize [wn (k) : ∀n] under CSI un-
certainty. It is notable that with given PB caching and
migration decisions d (k), the participation of each edge
node, i.e., λn (k), can be determined by (3). We define
w (k) = [wT
1 (k) , . . . , wT
N (k)]
T ∈CMN×1 and W (k) =
w (k) wH (k) ∈CMN×MN, then the beamforming problem
for broadcasting PB k can be recast as
P2(k) : min
W(k),ζ
1
ζ ,
(23a)
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
9
s.t.
min
en,u(k)∈En,u,∀n Ru (k) ≥I {k ∈Kru} Qu, ∀u,
(23b)
XnM
l=(n−1)M+1 [W (k)]l,l ≤P max, ∀n,
(23c)
1
ζ ≥
I {k ∈Kru} S (k)
min
en,u(k)∈En,u,∀n Ru (k), ∀u,
(23d)
W (k) ⪰0,
(23e)
rank [W (k)] = 1,
(23f)
where ζ is an auxiliary variable with 1
ζ being the maximum
worst case broadcasting delay among users, and Ru (k) can
be rewritten as
Ru (k) = B×
log2
 1+
˜hu (k)+eu (k)
HW(k)
˜hu (k)+eu (k)

/σ2
u

, (24)
where ˜hu (k) = [λ1 (k) ˜hT
1,u (k) , . . . , λN (k) ˜hT
N,u (k)]
T and
eu (k)
=
[λ1 (k) eT
1,u (k) , . . . , λN (k) eT
N,u (k)]
T
are the
stacked imperfect channel and estimation error for user u,
respectively. To handle the infinite possibilities of channel
errors in constraints (23b) and (23d), we invoke S-Procedure
as illustrated in the following lemma [39].
Lemma 1: Let A1, A2 ∈HMN×MN, b1, b2 ∈CMN×1,
κ1, κ2 ∈R, for ∀e ∈CMN×1, the implication
eHA1e + 2 Re

bH
1 e
	
+ κ1 ≤0
(25a)
⇒eHA2e + 2 Re

bH
2 e
	
+ κ2 ≤0
(25b)
holds if and only if there exists a ε ≥0 such that

εA1 −A2
εb1 −b2
εbH
1 −bH
2
εκ1 −κ2

⪰0.
(26)
Take (23b) as an example, we first rewrite it as
max
en,u(k)∈En,u,∀n I {k ∈Kru} ·

−eH
u (k) W (k) eu (k)
+ 2 Re
n
−˜hH
u (k) W (k) eu (k)
o
+κ⟨1⟩
u (k)

≤0, ∀u, (27)
where κ⟨1⟩
u (k) = σ2
u
 2Qu/B −1

−˜hH
u (k) W (k) ˜hu (k).
According to (4), we also have
eH
u (k) Cueu (k) −N ≤0, Cu =


C1,u. . . O
...
...
...
O . . .CN,u

, ∀u. (28)
Then, by substituting (28) into (25a) and (27) into (25b),
constraint (23b) can be transformed into
I{k∈Kru}·
"
ε⟨1⟩
u Cu + W (k) WH (k) ˜hu (k)
˜hH
u (k) W (k) −ε⟨1⟩
u N −κ⟨1⟩
u (k)
#
⪰0, ∀u,(29)
where ε⟨1⟩
u
is a non-negative auxiliary variable. Analogously,
we convert (23d) into
I {k∈Kru}·
"
ε⟨2⟩
u Cu+W (k) WH (k) ˜hu (k)
˜hH
u (k) W (k) −ε⟨2⟩
u N −κ⟨2⟩
u (k)
#
⪰0, ∀u, (30)
where κ⟨2⟩
u (k) = σ2
u
 2ζS(k)/B −1

−˜hH
u (k) W (k) ˜hu (k).
Subsequently, we tackle non-convex rank constraint (23f)
by constructing an equivalent difference-of-convex (DC) ex-
pression. Specifically, rank [W (k)] = 1 if and only if W (k)
possesses only one nonzero eigenvalue, i.e., σ1 [W (k)] >
0, σm [W (k)] = 0, m ∈{2, . . . , MN}, thus we have
tr [W (k)]=
MN
X
m=1
σm [W (k)]=σ1 [W (k)]=∥W (k)∥. (31)
As a consequence, define ε =
h
ε⟨1⟩
u , ε⟨2⟩
u
: ∀u
i
, we can
transform P2 into the following DC program:
P2.1(k) :
min
W(k),ζ,ε
1
ζ + µ (tr [W (k)] −∥W (k)∥) ,
(32)
s.t. (23c), (23e), (29), (30)
where µ is the regularization parameter [40]. Then, we
linearize the concave part −∥W (k)∥in (32) and reach a
stationary solution by iteratively solving P2.2(k) in the sequel
P2.2(k) :
min
W(k),ζ,ε
1
ζ +µ
 tr [W (k)]−tr

¯u1¯uH
1 W (k)

, (33)
s.t. (23c), (23e), (29), (30)
where ¯u1¯uH
1 = ∂∥W∥
∂W

W= ¯
W(k) with ¯u1 denoting the eigen-
vector corresponding to the maximum eigenvalue of ¯
W (k),
and ¯
W (k) is the solution obtained from the previous iteration.
Notice that P2.2(k) pertains to convex optimization issue that
can be solved by interior-point method (IPM). Finally, the
proposed robust CoMP beamforming subroutine converges to
a rank-one solution W (k), then we reconstruct beamforming
vector w (k) through eigenvalue decomposition.
Remark 2 (Solution Quality of the Beamforming Subrou-
tine): The proposed approach leverages the S-Procedure to
handle channel uncertainty and reformulates the rank-1 con-
straint via DC programming. The introduction of auxiliary
variables, each with a properly defined feasible region accord-
ing to S-Procedure theory, does not affect optimality [39]. The
DC program is iteratively solved using a first-order approxi-
mation of the spectral norm, which may lead to sub-optimal
solutions. Nevertheless, as reported in [40], this approach
achieves superior solution quality and computational efficiency
compared to the conventional Gaussian randomization method
for recovering rank-1 solutions.
G. Overall Training Algorithm for MAASN-DA
The developed training algorithm for MAASN-DA is out-
lined in Algorithm 1. In each time step k, the edge node agents
make PB caching and migration decisions exploiting the action
semantics actor network, then the CoMP beamforming is
derived from the embedded optimization subroutine (Lines 4-
9). After collecting experience tuples via agent-environment
interactions, we invoke the ESN to synthesize additional
training samples while tuning the ESN, followed by perform-
ing data generation control (Lines 10-19). Afterwards, the
global Q-value is obtained based on the value decomposition
critic network, then the actor and critic network parameters
are updated by minimizing the loss functions (Lines 20-24).
Finally, the well-trained agents can efficiently coordinate AI
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
10
Algorithm 1 Overall Training Algorithm for MAASN-DA
1: Input:
AI
model
repository
J, K, Kj, ∀j,
user
requests
U, ru, Qu, ∀u,
FGAMCD
environment
N, M, B, P max, Cn, ˜hn,u (k) , Cn,u, Rbac
n,m (k) , ∀n, u, m,
and learning hyperparameters.
2: Initialize: Parameter of ESN ηin, ηre, ηout, actor network
φn, ∀n, critic network θn, θmix, ∀n, and target networks
ˆφn, ˆθn, ˆθmix, ∀n, replay buffer B.
3: for e ∈E = {1, . . . , E} do
4:
for k ∈K do
5:
Each agent n observes on (k) and takes action
dn (k) = π (on (k) ; φn).
6:
Iteratively solve P2.2(k) to optimize CoMP beam-
forming w (k).
7:
Calculate reward r (k) and transit to the next state
s (k + 1).
8:
Store (s (k) , d (k) , r (k) , s (k + 1)) in B.
9:
end for
10:
while 1 do
11:
Sample
experience
(s (k) , d (k) , r (k) , s (k + 1))
from B.
12:
Invoke the ESN to predict (¯r (k) ,¯s (k + 1)).
13:
Tune the ESN by minimizing Le (ηout) in (16).
14:
if ∥(¯r (k) ,¯s (k + 1)) −(r (k) , s (k + 1))∥≤ξ then
15:
Store (s (k) , d (k) , ¯r (k) ,¯s (k + 1)) in B.
16:
else if the number of synthetic samples reaches τe
then
17:
break
18:
end if
19:
end while
20:
Sample a mini-batch of samples from B.
21:
Calculate the global Q-value using (19).
22:
Update
the
critic
network
by
minimizing
Lc  {θn} , θmix
in (21).
23:
Update the actor network by minimizing La (φn) , ∀n
in (22).
24:
Slowly update the target networks.
25: end for
26: Output: Well-trained edge node agents for optimizing
a, b, w.
model caching and delivery processes, responding to diverse
user requests and uncertain channel estimations, thus ensuring
low-latency AI model downloading.
IV. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS FOR MAASN-DA
In this section, we present theoretical analysis for the
proposed MAASN-DA approach. To begin with, we analyze
the convergence performance of critic network, characterizing
the approximation error of Q-value and offering guidelines
for configuring the hyperparameters of data augmentation
experience replay. Afterwards, the convergence of actor net-
work is analyzed, ensuring the achievement of local-optimal
PB caching and downloading decisions. Lastly, we present
complexity analysis for MAASN-DA.
A. Convergence Analysis for Critic Network
We commence by making some assumptions that are com-
monly utilized in neural network analysis 10.
Assumption 1: The state, action, and reward in each time
step are bounded by ∥s (k)∥≤Bs, ∥d (k)∥≤Bd, |r (k)| ≤
Br, ∀k. This assumption is typically met due to all elements
in s (k), d (k) and r (k) possess explicit physical meanings.
Assumption 2: The ESN for generating synthetic samples
satisfies the echo state property, i.e., the spectral norms of
weight matrices satisfy ∥ηin∥≤ψmax
in
, ∥ηre∥≤ψmax
re
< 1,
and ηout ≤ψmax
out . This assumption can be met by reasonably
initializing the weights of the ESN [37].
Assumption 3: The value decomposition critic network can
be fitted by a deep recurrent Q network (DRQN) with input,
recurrent, and output weights ωin, ωre, and ωout, respectively.
This RNN is able to estimate the Q-value as: p (k) =
tanh (ωinv (k) + ωrep (k −1)) , Q (s (k) , d (k)) = ωoutp (k),
with given the state sequence up to step k. This assumption
stems from the wide adaptation of DRQN in value decompo-
sition MADRL [38].
Assumption 4: The training of the critic network can be
simplified as the fitted-Q iteration algorithm [41], in which the
Q-value function is updated E episodes, and the experience
relay is deemed as a sampling distribution Ωover S × D.
Since the actor network is updated to maximize the Q-value
estimated by the critic, this yields the greedy policy πE after
E iterations.
Under Assumption 1-4, we establish the following theorem
to illustrate the convergence of the critic network.
Theorem 1: Let QπE be the Q-value corresponding to πE
and Q∗= supπQπ be the optimal Q-value. The Q-value
approximation error is upper-bounded by
EΞ [|QπE −Q∗|] ≤
4γE+1
(1 −γ)2 Br
|
{z
}
Algorithmic error
+ ϑΞ,Ω
"
2γ
(1 −γ)2
√
νmax + ξ (1 + γϕmax
out ϕmax
in
)
#
|
{z
}
Statistical error
,
(34)
where Ξ signifies the distribution corresponding to the Dec-
POMDP in Section III-B, and ϑΞ,Ωdenotes the concentration
coefficient determined by Ξ and Ω. ϕmax
in
and ϕmax
out
are the
bounds of ∥ωin∥and ∥ωout∥, respectively. νmax represents the
maximum one-step error, given by
νmax ≤4 max

Br/(1 −γ) −ςLDRQN
ς
, 0
	2
|
{z
}
Estimation bias
+ D1V 2 ln U DRQN
ς
/K′ + D2V 2ς
|
{z
}
Estimation variance
,
(35)
10Please note that these assumptions are only imposed to derive the
closed-form convergence bound and extract theoretical insights; the actual
implementation of the proposed algorithm does not depend on them. Violating
these assumptions may lead to inaccurate bound characterization and sub-
optimal hyperparameter selection, thereby degrading training convergence.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
11
where
K′ = K(1 + τ0 −τ0
ξ {ψmax
out ψmax
in
q
B2s + B2
d
1 −(ψmax
re
)K
1 −ψmax
re
+
p
B2r + B2s})
denotes the number of training samples in each episode, and
ς is a positive constant. D1 = 8
√
2K′ + 256/V , D2 =
4
√
2K′ + 52, V = Br/(1 −γ). LDRQN
ς
and U DRQN
ς
are the
upper- and lower-bounds of the exterior ς-number of the
DRQN, respectively.
Proof: Please refer to Appendix A.
■
Theorem 1 reveals that the Q-value approximation error in
(34) is composed by an algorithmic error and a statistical error.
The algorithmic error asymptotically diminishing to zero as
the training proceeds. The statistical error is caused by the
bias and variance that arise in estimating the Q-value function
using the critic network (characterized by (35)), as well as the
prediction inaccuracies of the ESN.
On the other side, K′ encompasses both real and synthetic
samples. Different from traditional experience replay that
only collect K samples in each episode, the proposed data
augmentation trick enlarges K′ to boost sample efficiency, thus
reducing the variance in Q-value estimation. Furthermore, it
is evident that K′ is influenced by τ0 and ξ, and the judicious
configure of these hyperparameters can mitigate the Q-value
approximation error. Consequently, τ0 and ξ are obtained by
numerically minimizing the upper bound in (34) via a two-
dimensional search. A practical example will be provided in
Section V-C, where we traverse all possible combinations of
τ0 and ξ to find the one achieving the minimum upper bound
value. Note that this search is performed only once prior to
training, incurring negligible overhead.
B. Convergence Analysis for Actor Network
We establish the following theorem to guarantee the con-
vergence of the actor network, thereby ensuring the attainment
of stable decisions of PB caching, migration, and broadcasting
beamforming.
Theorem 2: In each time step of Algorithm 1, the CoMP
beamforming subroutine converges within a finite number
of iterations. Moreover, the action semantics actor network
converges to a local optimal policy, i.e.,
lim
E→∞∥∇φnLa (φn)∥= 0, ∀n.
(36)
Proof: Please refer to Appendix B.
■
C. Computational Complexity and Signaling Cost Analysis
The computational complexity of Algorithm 1 is analyzed
below. Typically, the training complexity of a L-layer neural
network is O
PL−1
l=1 2 (Υl −1) Υl+1

, where Υl denotes
the number of neurons in the l-th layer. In Appendix C,
we present the detailed architectures of actor network, critic
network, and ESN, which can be substituted into this for-
mula to calculate the corresponding complexities O (Coact),
O (Cocri), and O (CoESN), respectively. Additionally, suppose
TABLE II
SIMULATION PARAMETERS
Parameter
Value
Parameter
Value
N
6
U
30
J
60
K
450
Qu
[5, 7] Gbps
Cn
1.25 GB
M
20
υ
-30 dB
α
3
σ2
u
-80 dBm
Cn,u
1010IM
B
400 MHz
Rbac
n,m (k)
[8, 12] Gbps
P max
43 dBm
r1, r2
10, 10
γ
0.95
τ0, ξ
0.8, 1.12
Λ
0.8
E, ¯E
600, 10
µ
1
that the optimization sub-routine needs I iterations to con-
verge, the beamforming design in each step has a complexity
of O

I
 M 2N 2
par
3.5
[42], where Npar denotes the number
of participating edge nodes in broadcasting each PB. Note that
Npar ≤N since the excessive PB migration among edge nodes
is prohibited to reduce backhaul link delay. As a consequence,
the overall training complexity for K steps and E episodes is
O

EK
h
N (Coact+Cocri)+CoESN+I
 M 2N 2
par
3.5i
. (37)
After
training,
the
implementation
stage
merely
re-
quires
executing
the
actor
network
and
the
optimiza-
tion subroutine, leading to a computational complexity of
O(K[NΥact,1Υact,L + I
 M 2N 2
par
3.5]), where Υact,l is the
number of neurons in the l-th layer of the actor. To form
the input observations, edge nodes exchange backhaul rates,
user requests, and remaining storage capacities, as speci-
fied in ooth
n,m (k) in (10b). The resultant signaling cost is
O(K P
n∈N
P
m∈N \{n} ϖn,m(|Um| + 2)).
V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
A. Simulation Setting and AI Model Repository Construction
In this section, we conduct simulations to evaluate the per-
formance as well as glean insights of our proposed FGAMCD
system. We consider a square area of 1 km2 with 4-8 edge
nodes and 18-48 randomly distributed users. The edge-user
wireless channel is generated based on (4), and the small-scale
fading ¯hn,u (k) follows Rician channel model with factor of
3. The default parameter setting is listed in Table II, we set
ϖn,m by allowing information exchange between edge nodes
less than 500 m away, and the neural network architectures of
MAASN-DA are given in Appendix C.
The AI model repository is constructed based on 3 basic
AI models, i.e., Inception-v3, ResNet-18, and MobileNet-v2,
per-trained on ImageNet. We fine-tune these models on the
CIFAR-100 dataset to generate 60 task-specific models. In
particular, each basic model is fine-tuned on 20 sub-datasets,
each corresponding to one of the 20 superclasses in CIFAR-
100 [43]. Therefore, the fine-tuned models are responsible
for classifying the images within their respective superclass,
e.g., the Inception-v3 model for “people” superclass is used
to distinguish “baby”, “boy”, “girl”, “man”, and “woman”.
Users request the 60 models in the repository according to a
Zipf distribution, where the request probability of model j is
given by j−ι/P60
i=1 i−ι, where distribution parameter ι = 0.5
in default with sensitivity analysis provided later.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
12
Fig. 4.
Inference accuracy versus AI
model parameter reuse ratio.
Fig. 5.
A visualization of AI
model parameter reuse, where dif-
ferent points indicate different PBs.
To capture the parameter reusability, we adopt a two-stage
AI model fine-tuning. In the first stage, all parameters of the
basic models are fine-tuned on several selected superclasses.
In the second stage, we freeze a portion of the parameters, and
further fine-tune the models on the remaining superclasses. For
instance, all parameters of the basic ResNet-18 are first fine-
tuned on “fruit and vegetables” superclass, the resulting model
is then fine-tuned on “flower” superclass, with bottom layers
frozen during this process. The frozen layers correspond to
the reusable PBs in the AI model repository.
B. Effectiveness of FGAMCD
Fig. 4 illustrates the impact of parameter reuse on the in-
ference accuracy of task-specific models, where the parameter
reuse ratio is controlled by adjusting the number of frozen lay-
ers during the second stage of fine-tuning. As can be observed,
when the parameter reuse ratio is moderate, the degradation in
inference accuracy is slight compared to full-parameter fine-
tuning (i.e., no frozen layer and a reuse ratio of 0). This
phenomenon demonstrates that the AI models fine-tuned for
different downstream tasks can share a proportion of PBs,
validating the effectiveness of our proposed FGAMCD. In the
subsequent experiments, we select appropriate parameter reuse
ratios for different basic models to ensure that the accuracy
loss remains below 5%.
Fig. 5 provides a visualization of AI model parameter reuse,
employing models 1-3 in the repository as an example. These
models are fine-tuned from the basic Inception-v3 model with
parameter reuse ratio of 33.41%, resulting in both reused and
individual PBs. If an edge node needs to cache models 1-3,
only one copy of the reused PBs is stored. Moreover, we adopt
the actual sizes of PBs (ranging from 3.71 KB to 24.31 MB)
to derive the numerical results, capturing their distinct storage
requirements on the edge nodes.
C. Learning Performance Evaluation
According to Theorem 1, Fig. 6 depicts the upper bound
of Q-value approximation error with different τ0 and ξ . We
set Bs = 1, Bd = 1, Br = 1 due to state/action/reward
normalization, ψmax
in
= 0.5, ψmax
re
= 0.5, ψmax
out
= 0.5 to
satisfy the echo state property, and ς = 0.1, ϕmax
in
= 0.5,
ϕmax
out
= 10, U DRQN
ς
= 201, LDRQN
ς
= 46.2 based on [37].
To minimize the Q-value approximation error, we select the
optimal hyperparameters τ0 = 0.8 and ξ = 1.12 for data
augmentation experience replay.
Fig. 6. Upper-bound of Q-value approximation error versus τ0 and ξ.
(a) Comparison of different training
algorithms.
(b) Comparison of different data aug-
mentation strategies.
Fig. 7. Accumulative reward versus training episode.
Fig. 7 assesses the learning performance of our proposed
MAASN-DA through an ablation study. The average values
(represented by the curves) and standard deviations (illustrated
by the shaded regions) of the cumulative reward are used to
evaluate convergence speed and stability, respectively. Baseline
learning algorithms are outlined below.
1) QMIX-DA [20], [32]: The actor-critic structure of
MAASN-DA is replaced by QMIX, which employs a DRQN
to estimate each agent’s Q-value for discrete actions, and
combines these via a mixing network to generate the global
Q-value. For a fair comparison, we also introduce the data
augmentation experience replay into QMIX.
2) Without Action Semantics Actor: The actor network for
each agent is replaced by a traditional fully-connected neural
network with two hidden layers, each containing 256 neurons.
3) Without Value Decomposition Critic: Each agent uses an
independent critic network to estimate its individual Q-value
without further aggregation or value decomposition.
4) Without Data Augmentation: We remove the ESN for
generating synthetic samples, and the neural networks are
trained solely using data from environment interactions.
5) RNN-Based Data Augmentation: The ESN is replaced
by a RNN with an identical architecture, where all weight
parameters are tunable.
6) Conditional Generative Adversarial Network (cGAN)-
Based Data Augmentation: We train a cGAN that leverages
v (k) as conditional information to generate (¯r (k) ,¯s (k + 1)),
while a discriminator is employed to distinguish real experi-
ence data from generated samples.
7) Non-Optimal Hyperparameter Setting: We set τ0 = 0.9
and ξ = 1.2 which are different from their optimal setting to
validate the theoretical convergence bound analysis.
In Fig. 7 (a), we observe that MAASN-DA achieves the
highest reward value with the fastest convergence speed. Com-
pared to QMIX-DA, the proposed approach utilizes an actor-
critic structure and invokes Gumbel-Softmax reparameteriza-
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
13
TABLE III
EVALUATION OF ALGORITHM RUNNING TIME PER STEP
Parameter
Optimization
Methods
settings
stages
MAASN-DA
Full CoMP
N = 6,
MADRL
0.01562 s
/
M = 20
Subroutine
0.6501 s
3.4136 s
N = 6,
MADRL
0.01606 s
/
M = 60
Subroutine
3.0884 s
60.321 s
N = 12,
MADRL
0.02013 s
/
M = 60
Subroutine
8.3760 s
366.083 s
tion to ensure the discrete constraint, thereby enhancing the
model’s ability to learn high-dimensional actions. MAASN-
DA outperforms without action semantics actor owing to its
explicit characterization of actions’ mutual influence, which
enables edge nodes to discern the diverse impact of different
action dimensions on other agents. For without value decom-
position critic, it is difficult for each agent to evaluate the
contribution of its own observation and action on the overall
system, leading to lower performance than MAASN-DA.
Additionally, the lower right corner of Fig. 7 (a) showcases the
convergence of the beamforming optimization subroutine. It is
evident that the subroutine converges within a few iterations
(on average 2-3) for all time steps, demonstrating its efficiency
for embedding into MAASN-DA.
Fig. 7 (b) illustrates that MAASN-DA outperforms baseline
data augmentation strategies, verifying the effectiveness of
incorporating ESN to boost sample efficiency. We can see
that the convergence performance of RNN-based data aug-
mentation is even worse than without data augmentation.
This is because tuning all parameters of the RNN makes
it difficult to find optimal weights, thereby slowing down
overall convergence. In contrast, ESN focuses exclusively on
tuning the output weights, and the weights can be efficiently
updated via ridge regression. cGAN-based data augmentation
fails to achieve satisfactory performance, as it struggles to
capture the time-dependent nature of state transitions, thereby
exhibiting limited compatibility in producing effective syn-
thetic samples for MADRL. Moreover, when using different τ0
and ξ in non-optimal hyperparameter setting, the degradation
in convergence performance aligns with the numerical result
in Fig. 6. To conclude, the ablation study corroborates the
indispensability of all proposed components in MAASN-DA.
Table III reports the running time of different optimization
stages (i.e., MADRL for caching and migration design, and
subroutine for beamforming optimization) under varying N
and M, where full CoMP refers to the traditional setting in
which all edge nodes participate in the delivery of each PB.
It can be observed that the well-trained MADRL agents incur
negligible delays for making a decision, while the running time
of the proposed optimization subroutine remains moderate.
In particular, when N = 12 and M = 60, our approach
reduces the time complexity by nearly two orders of magnitude
compared with full CoMP. The reason is that MAASN-
DA strategically designs PB migration to manage backhaul
latency, ensuring that the number of participating edge nodes
in broadcasting each PB does not scale monotonically with
N, hence the dimensionality of the beamforming variables
remains moderate.
D. System Performance Evaluation
In this subsection, we evaluate the performance of the
FGAMCD system. In addition to the previously discussed
QMIX-DA, the following benchmark methods are employed
for comparison.
1) TrimCaching [27]: This method optimizes AI model
caching at edge nodes by exploiting parameter shareability
to maximize the cache hit ratio, i.e., the satisfaction of user
requests. The caching decisions are optimized using a greedy
algorithm. As the original method does not account for active
PB migration and CoMP beamforming, the corresponding
variables are optimized through our proposed approach.
2) Without Edge Cooperation [28]: In this method, each
edge node independently optimizes its model caching based
on the requests of its associated users. During the downloading
phase, the edge node broadcasts its cached PBs to the associ-
ated users, while the PB migration and CoMP are omitted.
3) Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA)-Based Unicas-
ting: The PB caching and migration are optimized by our
approach. Then, edge nodes unicast the requested PBs to
each user via TDMA. Since the PB delivery for each user
is orthogonal, the CoMP beamforming is determined using
maximum ratio transmission.
4) Coarse-Grained Caching [10], [11]: Similar to conven-
tional content caching, edge nodes directly select the entire
AI models for caching, disregarding the parameter reusability
among different models. Afterwards, whole AI models are
delivered to users during the downloading phase.
Fig. 8 shows the relationship between model downloading
delay and edge storage capacity Cn. As Cn increases, all
curves exhibit a downward trend. The rationale is that larger
storage capacity allows edge nodes to cache more PBs or mod-
els, which facilitates the execution of CoMP broadcasting and
improves the downloading channel conditions. Furthermore,
the proposed MAASN-DA reduces model downloading delay
by 12.20%, 12.24%, 23.30%, 29.74%, and 67.86%, respec-
tively, compared to the five benchmark methods. TrimCaching
focuses on maximizing the cache hit ratio but overlooks the
interplay between edge model placement and delivery, the
resultant caching decisions do not effectively reduce model
downloading delay. For without edge cooperation, each edge
node only serves its associated users and PB migration is not
considered, thus missing the performance improvement intro-
duced by CoMP broadcasting. Both TDMA-based unicasting
and coarse-grained caching exhibit high model downloading
delays since neither method leverages parameter reusability
during the caching and downloading phases, leading to inef-
ficient use of storage and communication resources. Notably,
coarse-grained caching fails to meet users’ QoS requirements
when edge storage capacity is limited.
In Fig. 9, one can observe that the model downloading
delay monotonically increases as the number of users grows.
This is because a larger variety of model requests necessitates
edge nodes to store more diverse PBs so as to meet QoS
requirements, which limits the performance improvement of
CoMP. Nonetheless, the reduction in model downloading delay
achieved by MAASN-DA remains significant, with improve-
ments of 13.06%, 12.44%, 25.38%, 42.85%, and 82.96% over
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
14
Fig. 8.
Model downloading delay
versus edge storage capacity.
Fig. 9.
Model downloading delay
versus number of users.
Fig. 10.
Model downloading delay
versus number of edge nodes.
Fig. 11.
Model downloading delay
versus number of antennas.
the five benchmark methods, respectively. More insightful,
it is found that the proposed FGAMCD system achieves a
two-fold performance gain compared to traditional systems,
owing to the exploitation of parameter reusability. The caching
efficiency gain is realized by eliminating redundant caching of
reusable PBs at edge nodes, while the downloading efficiency
gain is achieved by broadcasting overlapping PBs to simulta-
neously fulfill the requests of multiple users. In addition, fully
unlocking this two-fold performance gain requires dedicated
PB caching, migration, and beamforming design, which is
effectively implemented by the proposed MAASN-DA.
Figs. 10-11 evaluate the model downloading delay under
different network scales. On the one hand, increasing the num-
ber of edge nodes N enhances the caching diversity and CoMP
gains, while the reduction in downloading delay gradually
diminishes when N becomes sufficiently large owing to the
limitation of backhaul rates. On the other hand, equipping edge
nodes with more antennas provides higher spatial multiplexing
gains, thereby enhancing downlink rates for PB broadcasting.
Furthermore, our MAASN-DA consistently outperforms the
baseline methods under large-scale network settings.
Fig. 12 presents a sensitivity analysis with different Zipf
distribution parameters ι, showing that the model downloading
delay decreases as ι increases. The rationale is that a larger
ι concentrates user requests on hotspot AI models, enabling
the PBs constituting these models to be cooperatively cached
across multiple edge nodes, thereby facilitating CoMP. This
result confirms the robustness of MAASN-DA in adapting to
diverse user request patterns.
Fig. 13 illustrates the delay performance of different
schemes under varying parameter reuse ratios across AI mod-
els. Notably, the proposed FGAMCD framework inherently
accommodates different reuse ratios by adjusting the input
information {K, Kj : ∀j}, without requiring any modification
to the decision-making process. As expected, low parameter
reuse leads to higher model downloading delay due to reduced
caching and broadcasting gains, while MAASN-DA degener-
Fig. 12.
Model downloading delay
versus Zipf distribution parameter.
Fig. 13.
Model downloading delay
versus parameter reuse ratio.
Fig. 14.
Impact of number of edge
nodes and average backhaul rate.
Fig. 15. Performance of the proposed
robust CoMP beamforming design.
ates to coarse-grained caching when the reuse ratio is zero.
Moreover, our approach performs well even under small reuse
ratios. For instance, when the reuse ratio is 8.70%, the down-
loading delay is reduced by 8.00%, 12.19%, 18.75%, 21.83%,
and 31.09% compared with the five benchmark schemes.
Fig. 14 delineates the impact of number of edge nodes
and average backhaul rate on the system performance. As we
observe, an increase in both the number of edge nodes and the
backhaul rate enhances PB migration and CoMP broadcasting,
thereby improving the average user rate and reducing model
downloading delay. This result further validates the scalability
of the proposed MAASN-DA approach, corroborating its
ability to learn the cooperative caching and migration policies,
while adapting to varying environmental factors such as the
number of edge nodes and the backhaul link conditions.
In Fig. 15, we plot the cumulative distribution function
(CDF) of model downloading rates across 200 channel error
realizations. To emphasize the advantages of the proposed
robust beamforming approach, we compare it with a non-
robust design, in which the QoS constraint in (9b) is simplified
as ˜Ru (k) ≥I {k ∈Kru} Qu, ∀k, u, with ˜Ru (k) being com-
puted based on the estimated CSI. As shown in this figure, the
downloading rates achieved by our robust design consistently
exceed Qu under different channel error settings Cn,u. In
contrast, the non-robust design may violate the QoS constraints
due to the fluctuations in channel errors. This highlights the
critical importance of robust beamforming in ensuring QoS
requirements during AI model downloading, particularly in
practical edge networks with CSI uncertainty.
Fig. 16 portrays the beampatterns obtained by the proposed
robust CoMP beamforming subroutine, where the beampattern
of each edge node n is calculated by
zH (θ) wn (k)
2 with
z (θ) being the steering vector towards direction θ. When
broadcasting PB k = 40, we find that edge node n = 2
not only serves its associated user but also radiates power
towards the user associated with a neighboring edge node.
This is owing to the edge nodes share the PB requested by
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
15
(a) n = 2, k = 40.
(b) n = 5, k = 370.
Fig. 16. Beampatterns of edge nodes for broadcasting different PBs.
Fig. 17. Integration of FGAMCD with hybrid multicasting.
users, hence CoMP is executed to boost the downloading rate.
Analogously, two edge nodes participate in the broadcasting
of PB k = 370, and the beampattern is appropriately steered
towards the requesting users.
In Fig. 17, we examine the integration of FGAMCD with
hybrid multicasting. To be specific, we introduce a PB popu-
larity threshold ϵhot. When the number of users requesting a PB
exceeds ϵhot, CoMP broadcasting across multiple edge nodes
is employed; otherwise, the PB is delivered via unicasting
from the associated or nearby edge node. As can be observed,
for different edge antennas settings, hybrid multicasting with
ϵhot = 2 achieves lower model downloading delay compared
to full CoMP broadcasting. The reason is that the transmission
mode is adaptively selected based on the popularity of each
PB, thereby enhancing the flexibility of FGAMCD and high-
lighting a promising research direction for future exploration.
E. Extension to LLM Caching and Downloading
In this subsection, we extend the evaluation of MAASN-
DA to billion-parameter LLMs. Specifically, we fine-tune
J = 20 LLMs based on Llama2-7B and Llama2-13B using the
LLaMA-Factory platform [44]. Starting from the pre-trained
models on HuggingFace, we freeze the embedding layers and
a certain number of initial decoder layers, while fine-tuning the
remaining decoders on different subsets of the LIMA [45] and
Dolly 15k [46] datasets. The perplexity (PPL) evaluation [44]
provided by LLaMA-Factory is employed to measure the per-
formance of the fine-tuned models. Experiments indicate that
freezing 28 decoder layers (corresponding to reusable PBs) in
Llama2-7B and 35 decoder layers in Llama2-13B leads to a
PPL increase of less than 5, which is considered acceptable. To
accommodate the incremental storage requirements of LLMs,
we adjust the default parameter setting to K = 285, Cn =
375 GB, B = 4×104 MHz, Rbac
n,m (k) ∈[3.2, 4.8]×103 Gbps,
thereby ensuring the feasibility of the solution.
Under the LLM setup, Fig. 18 (a)-(b) illustrate the model
downloading delays with respect to edge storage capacity
(a) Varying edge storage capacity.
(b) Varying number of edge nodes.
Fig. 18.
Model downloading delay evaluation using fine-tuned Llama2-7B
and Llama2-13B models.
and the number of edge nodes, respectively, which follow
consistent trends with those observed in Figs. 8 and 10.
Numerical results demonstrate that the proposed MAASN-DA
outperforms QMIX-DA, TrimCaching, without edge cooper-
ation, TDMA-based unicasting, and coarse-grained caching
by 5.68%, 8.80%, 14.7%, 30.52%, and 50.86%, respectively,
when N = 6 and Cn = 375 GB. Owing to the pronounced
parameter reusability of LLMs, these results corroborate the
applicability of MAASN-DA in improving the caching and
downloading efficiency for edge LLM deployment.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this work, we proposed the FGAMCD system to achieve
adaptive and low-latency model downloading for on-device
AI inference. To unleash the full potential of this system,
PB caching, migration, and broadcasting beamforming were
jointly optimized to minimize the total model downloading
delay, satisfying user QoS requirements, edge storage capacity
and transmission power constraints. We developed MAASN-
DA, an improved MADRL framework, to enable this joint
optimization in a distributed manner. Specifically, MAASN-
DA facilitated cooperative decision-making for PB caching
and migration via action semantics actor as well as value de-
composition critic networks. Moreover, it leveraged an ESN to
generate synthetic training samples, thereby enriching the re-
play buffer and accelerating policy training. We also designed
a robust CoMP beamforming subroutine to optimize broadcast-
ing beamformers under CSI uncertainty, which was integrated
into the reward calculation to complete the MAASN-DA
training loop. Our theoretical analysis showed the convergence
of both actor and critic networks, while providing guidelines
for configuring learning hyperparameter. In our simulations,
the ablation study confirmed the superior learning performance
of the MAASN-DA compared to existing MADRL baselines.
Furthermore, the FGAMCD system achieved a two-fold per-
formance gain over conventional coarse-grained caching and
TDMA-based unicasting schemes, effectively reducing model
downloading delay by 29.74% to 67.86%.
APPENDIX A
PROOF OF THEOREM 1
According to Theorem 4.5 in [41], when the training pro-
cess only incorporates real samples, the approximation error
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
16
 ¯Q∗−Q∗ (a)
=
¯r (k) −r (k) + γ

Q
 ¯s (k + 1) , ¯d (k + 1)

−Q (s (k + 1) , d (k + 1))

≤|¯r (k) −r (k)| + γ |Q (¯s (k + 1) , d (k + 1)) −Q (s (k + 1) , d (k + 1))|
= |¯r (k) −r (k)| + γ |ωout [tanh (ωin¯v (k + 1) + ωrep (k)) −tanh (ωinv (k + 1) + ωrep (k))]|
≤|¯r (k) −r (k)| + γ |ωout [ωin (¯s (k + 1) −s (k + 1))]|
≤|¯r (k) −r (k)| + γϕmax
out ϕmax
in
∥¯s (k + 1) −s (k + 1)∥
(b)
≤ξ (1 + γϕmax
out ϕmax
in
)
(40)
between QπE and Q∗is upper-bounded by
EΞ [|QπE −Q∗|] ≤2ϑΞ,Ωγ
(1 −γ)2
√
νmax + 4γE+1
(1 −γ)2 Br,
(38)
where Ξ signifies a fixed distribution of the Dec-POMDP
in Section III-B, ϑΞ,Ωdenotes the concentration coefficient
determined by Ξ and Ω. νmax = max
e∈E EΩ
h ˜Qe −T ˜Qe−1

i
represents the maximum one-step error, ˜Qe is the Q-value in
the e-th episode, T is the Bellman optimality operator. Since
our work adopts the ESN to generate synthetic samples, we
define the optimal Q-value with respect to both the real and
synthetic samples as ¯Q∗, then we modify (38) into
EΞ [|QπE −Q∗|] = EΞ
QπE −¯Q∗+ ¯Q∗−Q∗
≤EΞ
QπE −¯Q∗
+ EΞ
 ¯Q∗−Q∗
≤2ϑΞ,Ωγ
(1 −γ)2 νmax + 4γE+1
(1 −γ)2 Br + EΞ
 ¯Q∗−Q∗
. (39)
Thereafter, we further express
 ¯Q∗−Q∗ in (40), where (a)
follows the Bellman equation. ¯d (k + 1) is the action output
by the actor under ¯s (k + 1), whose Q-value is higher than that
of taking d (k + 1) under ¯s (k + 1). ϕmax
in
and ϕmax
out
are the
bounds of ∥ωin∥and ∥ωout∥, respectively. (b) is owing to the
data quality selection in (17). By substituting (40) into (39),
the error bound is given by
EΞ [|QπE −Q∗|]
≤ϑΞ,Ω

2γ
(1−γ)2
√
νmax+ξ (1+γϕmax
out ϕmax
in
)

+ 4γE+1
(1−γ)2 Br.
(41)
To proceed with, we derive an upper-bound of νmax. Specif-
ically, Theorem 2 in [37] is extended as follows
νmax ≤4 max

Br/(1 −γ) −ςLDRQN
ς
, 0
	2
+ D1V 2 ln U DRQN
ς
/K′ + D2V 2ς,
(42)
where ς is a positive constant, K′ denotes the number of
training samples in each episode. D1 = 8
√
2K′ + 256/V ,
D2 = 4
√
2K′ + 52, V = Br/(1 −γ). LDRQN
ς
and U DRQN
ς
are
the upper- and lower-bounds of the exterior ς-number of the
DRQN, respectively, whose specific expressions can be seen
in Appendix B of [37].
Our subsequent aim is to characterize K′ by taking into
account both real and synthetic samples. For tractable analysis,
we only consider the effect of the maximum initial number
of synthetic samples τ0K and neglect its decay with training
episodes. Therefore, K′ is given by
K′ =K+τ0K Pr {∥(¯r (k) ,¯s (k+1))−(r (k) , s (k+1))∥≤ξ}
(a)
≥K+τ0K (1−E [∥(¯r (k) ,¯s (k+1))−(r (k) , s (k+1))∥]/ξ)
≥K
 1 + τ0 −τ0
ξ {E [∥(¯r (k) ,¯s (k + 1))∥]
+ E [∥(r (k) , s (k + 1))∥]}

,
(43)
where
(a)
is
due
to
the
Markov
inequality.
Since
(¯r (k) ,¯s (k + 1)) is output by the ESN, we can bound it as
below
∥q (k)∥=∥tanh (ηinv (k)+ηreq (k−1))∥
≤∥ηinv (k)+ηreq (k−1)∥
≤∥ηin∥∥v (k)∥+ ∥ηre∥∥q (k −1)∥
(a)
≤ψmax
in
q
B2s + B2
d + ψmax
re
∥q (k −1)∥,
(44)
where (a) follows Assumption 1. By calculating the sum of
geometric series with ∥q (0)∥= 0, we have
∥q (k)∥≤ψmax
in
p
Bs + Bd
k−1
X
i=0
(ψmax
re
)i
= ψmax
in
q
B2s + B2
d
1 −(ψmax
re
)k
1 −ψmax
re
.
(45)
Thus, the output of the ESN is bounded by
∥(¯r (k) ,¯s (k + 1))∥≤∥ηoutq (k)∥≤∥ηoutq (K)∥
≤ψmax
out ψmax
in
q
B2s + B2
d
1 −(ψmax
re
)K
1 −ψmax
re
.
(46)
Besides,
we
can
obtain
from
Assumption
1
that
∥(r (k) , s (k + 1))∥
≤
p
B2r + B2s, then K′
is further
derived in (47). Plugging (47) into (42), and (42) into (41),
we can derive Theorem 1. This completes the proof.
APPENDIX B
PROOF OF THEOREM 2
Since the CoMP beamforming subroutine is executed in
each time step k of Algorithm 1, we first prove that the
beamforming problem P2(k) can be solved within a finite
number of iterations. Denote f (W) and f up (W) as the
objective value in (32) and (33) for a feasible solution W,
respectively. Given
¯
W (k) from the previous iteration, by
solving the P2.2(k), we have
f
  ¯
W (k)
 (a)
= f up   ¯
W (k)
 (b)
≥f up (W (k))
(c)
≥f (W (k)) ,
(48)
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
17
K′ ≥K
 
1 + τ0 −τ0
ξ
(
ψmax
out ψmax
in
q
B2s + B2
d
1 −(ψmax
re
)K
1 −ψmax
re
+
p
B2r + B2s
)!
.
(47)
Fig. 19. Neural network architectures of MAASN-DA.
where (a) holds owing to the approximation in (20) is tight
with given point ¯
W (k), (b) is attributed to that P2.2(k) is
addressed optimally with solution W (k), (c) follows that f up
is a upper bound of f due to the linearization. (48) indicates
that f is non-increasing after each optimization. In addition,
according to [40], when P2.1(k) with regularization term is
solved, the attained W (k) is a KKT point of P2(k). This
ensures that the rank-one constraint (23f) is met, yielding a
converged beamforming decision.
Subsequently, we show the convergence of the action
semantics actor network. Given the actor of each agent
π (on (k) ; φn), the joint policy can be expressed as π =
Q
n∈N
π (on (k) ; φn). After performing gradient descent on the
actor loss in (22) to generate new policy πnew, we have the
following inequality:
Qπnew(s (k),d (k))≥Qπ(s (k),d (k)) , ∀(s (k) ,d (k))∈S×D.
(49)
Let E →∞, we get QπE > Qπ for any πE ̸= π. According
to Theorem 1, QπE can converge to Q∗with an error bound,
then the joint policy πE that maximize QπE is local optimal.
Therefore, the minimum loss value characterized by (36) is
achieved. This completes the proof.
APPENDIX C
NEURAL NETWORK ARCHITECTURES OF MAASN-DA
With default parameter setting in Section V, the neural
network architectures of MAASN-DA are shown in Fig. 19.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Mao, X. Yu, K. Huang et al., “Green edge AI: A contemporary
survey,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 112, no. 7, pp. 880–911, 2024.
[2] ITU-R, “Framework and overall objectives of the future development of
IMT for 2030 and beyond,” Nov. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.
itu.int/en/ITU-R/study-groups/rsg5/rwp5d/imt-2030/Pages/default.aspx
[3] Y. Fu, P. Qin, J. Zhang et al., “Joint AI inference and target tracking at
network edge: A hybrid offline-online design for UAV-enabled network,”
IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 17 959–17 973,
2024.
[4] M. A. Rahman, “A survey on security and privacy of multimodal LLMs -
connected healthcare perspective,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf.
Workshops (GC Wkshps), 2023, pp. 1807–1812.
[5] S. Mehta, M. H. Sekhavat, Q. Cao et al., “OpenELM: An efficient
language model family with open training and inference framework,”
2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.14619
[6] K. Huang, H. Wu, Z. Liu et al., “In-situ model downloading to realize
versatile edge AI in 6G mobile networks,” IEEE Wireless Commun.,
vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 96–102, 2023.
[7] 3GPP,
document
TS
22.874,
“Study
on
traffic
characteristics
and
performance
requirements
for
AI/ML
model
transfer,”
Jun.
2021.
[Online].
Available:
https://portal.3gpp.org/desktopmodules/
Specifications/SpecificationDetails.aspx?specificationId=3721
[8] 3GPP, document TS 22.261, “Service requirements for the 5G system,”
Mar. 2025. [Online]. Available: https://portal.3gpp.org/ChangeRequests.
aspx?q=1&versionId=92077&release=195
[9] G. Qu, Q. Chen, W. Wei et al., “Mobile edge intelligence for large
language models: A contemporary survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys
Tuts., pp. 1–1, 2025.
[10] W. Fan, Z. Chen, Z. Hao et al., “DNN deployment, task offloading, and
resource allocation for joint task inference in IIoT,” IEEE Trans Ind.
Informat., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1634–1646, 2023.
[11] K. Zhao, Z. Zhou, X. Chen et al., “EdgeAdaptor: Online configuration
adaption, model selection and resource provisioning for edge DNN
inference serving at scale,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 22, no. 10,
pp. 5870–5886, 2023.
[12] P. Qin, M. Fu, Y. Fu et al., “Collaborative edge computing and pro-
gram caching with routing plan in C-NOMA-enabled space-air-ground
network,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 18 302–
18 315, 2024.
[13] P. Qin, Y. Fu, J. Zhang et al., “DRL-based resource allocation and
trajectory planning for NOMA-enabled multi-UAV collaborative caching
6G network,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 6, pp. 8750–8764,
2024.
[14] W. Fan, Q. Meng, G. Wang et al., “Satellite edge intelligence: DRL-
based resource management for task inference in LEO-based satellite-
ground collaborative networks,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., pp. 1–18,
2025.
[15] J. Yan, S. Bi, and Y.-J. A. Zhang, “Optimal model placement and online
model splitting for device-edge co-inference,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 8354–8367, 2022.
[16] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “SplitPlace: AI augmented
splitting and placement of large-scale neural networks in mobile edge
environments,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 22, no. 9, pp. 5539–
5554, 2023.
[17] J. Chen, X. Liang, J. Xue et al., “Evolution of RAN architectures
toward 6G: Motivation, development, and enabling technologies,” IEEE
Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 1950–1988, 2024.
[18] M. Jafri, S. Srivastava, N. K. D. Venkategowda et al., “Cooperative
hybrid transmit beamforming in cell-free mmwave MIMO networks,”
IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 5, pp. 6023–6038, 2023.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
18
[19] J.-M. Liang, S. Mishra, and I.-C. Chien, “Enhanced cell clustering and
multicast scheduling for energy-efficient 5G/B5G MBSFN networks,”
IEEE Internet Things J., pp. 1–1, 2025.
[20] J. Chen, K. Zhai, Z. Wang et al., “CoMP and RIS-assisted multicast
transmission in a multi-UAV communication system,” IEEE Trans.
Commun., vol. 72, no. 6, pp. 3602–3617, 2024.
[21] N. Babu, C. Masouros, C. B. Papadias et al., “Precoding for multi-cell
ISAC: From coordinated beamforming to coordinated multipoint and
bi-static sensing,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 10, pp.
14 637–14 651, 2024.
[22] G. Xie, Z. Xiong, R. Xie et al., “Mixture of experts-enabled parallel
scheduling and processing for vehicular generative AI services,” IEEE
Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw., pp. 1–1, 2025.
[23] Y. Li, Z. Yi, D. Guo et al., “Joint communication and offloading strategy
of CoMP UAV-assisted MEC networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., pp.
1–1, 2025.
[24] Z. Lyu, Y. Li, G. Zhu et al., “Rethinking resource management in edge
learning: A joint pre-training and fine-tuning design paradigm,” IEEE
Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 1584–1601, 2025.
[25] H. Wu, X. Chen, and K. Huang, “Resource management for low-latency
cooperative fine-tuning of foundation models at the network edge,” IEEE
Trans. Wireless Commun., pp. 1–1, 2025.
[26] E. Hu, Y. Shen, P. Wallis et al., “LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large
language models,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), 2022.
[27] G. Qu, Z. Lin, F. Liu et al., “Trimcaching: Parameter-sharing AI model
caching in wireless edge networks,” in IEEE International Conference
on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS), 2024, pp. 36–46.
[28] H. Wu, Q. Zeng, and K. Huang, “Efficient multiuser AI downloading
via reusable knowledge broadcasting,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 10 459–10 472, 2024.
[29] R. Wang, J. Liang, C. Feng et al., “Model ownership protection for
healthcare consumer electronics in federated edge learning,” IEEE Trans.
Consumer Electron., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 4616–4627, 2025.
[30] H. Geng, Y. Li, S. Wang et al., “Layer redundancy aware DNN model
repository planning for fast model download in edge cloud,” IEEE Trans.
Cloud Comput., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 1038–1049, 2025.
[31] X. Gong, X. Liu, A.-A. Lu et al., “Digital twin of channel: Diffusion
model for sensing-assisted statistical channel state information genera-
tion,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 3805–3821,
2025.
[32] P. Qin, Y. Fu, K. Wu et al., “Packet routing and energy cooperation
for RTU satellite-terrestrial multi-hop network in remote cyber-physical
power system,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 3585–
3597, 2024.
[33] P. Qin, Y. Fu, R. Ding et al., “Competition-awareness partial task
offloading and UAV deployment for multitier parallel computational
internet of vehicles,” IEEE Syst. J., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 1753–1764, 2024.
[34] W. Fan, P. Chen, X. Chun et al., “MADRL-based model partition-
ing, aggregation control, and resource allocation for cloud-edge-device
collaborative split federated learning,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput.,
vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 5324–5341, 2025.
[35] T. T. Nguyen, N. D. Nguyen, and S. Nahavandi, “Deep reinforcement
learning for multiagent systems: A review of challenges, solutions, and
applications,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 50, no. 9, pp. 3826–3839, 2020.
[36] W. Wang, T. Yang, Y. Liu et al., “Action semantics network:
Considering the effects of actions in multiagent systems,” 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.11461
[37] H.-H. Chang, N. Mohammadi, R. Safavinejad et al., “Dyna-ESN:
Efficient deep reinforcement learning for partially observable dynamic
spectrum access,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., pp. 1–1, 2024.
[38] T. Rashid, M. Samvelyan, C. S. de Witt et al., “QMIX: Monotonic value
function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforcement learning,”
2018. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.11485
[39] Z. Wei, X. Yu, D. W. K. Ng et al., “Resource allocation for simultaneous
wireless information and power transfer systems: A tutorial overview,”
Proc. IEEE, vol. 110, no. 1, pp. 127–149, 2022.
[40] K. Yang, Y. Shi, W. Yu et al., “Energy-efficient processing and robust
wireless cooperative transmission for edge inference,” IEEE Internet
Things J., vol. 7, no. 10, pp. 9456–9470, 2020.
[41] Z. Yang, Y. Xie, and Z. Wang, “A theoretical analysis of deep Q-
learning,” in Proceedings of the 2nd Conference on Learning for
Dynamics and Control (L4DC), 2020, pp. 486–489.
[42] Y. Fu, P. Qin, G. Tang et al., “Joint design of sensing, communication,
and computation for multi-UAV-enabled over-the-air federated learning,”
IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., pp. 1–17, 2025.
[43] Z. Zhang, Y. Zhao, H. Li et al., “DVFO: Learning-based DVFS for
energy-efficient edge-cloud collaborative inference,” IEEE Trans. Mobile
Comput., vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 9042–9059, 2024.
[44] Y.
Zheng,
R.
Zhang,
J.
Zhang
et
al.,
“LlamaFactory:
Unified
efficient fine-tuning of 100+ language models,” in Proceedings of
the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 3: System Demonstrations).
Bangkok, Thailand:
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2403.13372
[45] C. Zhou, P. Liu, P. Xu et al., “LIMA: Less is more for alignment,”
NeurIPS, vol. 36, 2024.
[46] Databricks,
Inc.,
“databricks-dolly-15k:
An
open
instruction-
following
dataset,”
https://huggingface.co/datasets/databricks/
databricks-dolly-15k, 2023.
