JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
1
Resource-Efficient Beam Prediction in mmWave Communications
with Multimodal Realistic Simulation Framework
Yu Min Park, Member, IEEE, Yan Kyaw Tun Member, IEEE, Eui-Nam Huh, Member, IEEE
Walid Saad, Fellow, IEEE, and Choong Seon Hong, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Beamforming is a key technology in millimeter-wave
(mmWave) communications that improves signal transmission
by optimizing directionality and intensity. However, conventional
channel estimation methods, such as pilot signals or beam sweep-
ing, often fail to adapt to rapidly changing communication en-
vironments. To address this limitation, multimodal sensing-aided
beam prediction has gained significant attention, using various
sensing data from devices such as LiDAR, radar, GPS, and RGB
images to predict user locations or network conditions. Despite
its promising potential, the adoption of multimodal sensing-aided
beam prediction is hindered by high computational complexity,
high costs, and limited datasets. Thus, in this paper, a novel
resource-efficient learning framework is introduced for beam pre-
diction, which leverages a custom-designed cross-modal relational
knowledge distillation (CRKD) algorithm specifically tailored for
beam prediction tasks, to transfer knowledge from a multimodal
network to a radar-only student model, achieving high accuracy
with reduced computational cost. To enable multimodal learning
with realistic data, a novel multimodal simulation framework
is developed while integrating sensor data generated from the
autonomous driving simulator CARLA with MATLAB-based
mmWave channel modeling, and reflecting real-world conditions.
The proposed CRKD achieves its objective by distilling relational
information across different feature spaces, which enhances beam
prediction performance without relying on expensive sensor data.
Simulation results demonstrate that CRKD efficiently distills
multimodal knowledge, allowing a radar-only model to achieve
94.62% of the teacher performance. In particular, this is achieved
with just 10% of the teacher network’s parameters, thereby
significantly reducing computational complexity and dependence
on multimodal sensor data.
Index Terms—Multimodal learning, simulation framework,
beamforming, sensing-aided beam prediction, relational knowl-
edge distillation, cross-modal learning.
I. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Millimeter-wave (mmWave) communications are widely
recognized as a key enabler for next-generation wireless
systems, because of their ability to provide high data rates and
support numerous bandwidth-intensive applications [1]. A cor-
nerstone technology in mmWave communication is beamform-
ing, which directs wireless signals to specific spatial directions
to improve signal strength and transmission quality [2]. How-
ever, mmWave signals experience high path loss and narrow
beamwidth. This, in turn, makes it challenging to perform
accurate beam alignment to maintain reliable links, particularly
in dynamic or high mobility scenarios. A commonly employed
solution for beam alignment is beam sweeping, in which the
transmitter (Tx) and receiver (Rx) systematically scan multiple
Yu Min Park is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Kyung Hee University, Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-do 17104, Rep. of Korea, and
also with the Bradley Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Virginia Tech, Alexandria, VA, 22305, USA, email: yumin0906@khu.ac.kr.
Yan Kyaw Tun is with the Department of Electronic Systems, Aalborg
University, A. C. Meyers Vænge 15, 2450 København, email: ykt@es.aau.dk.
Walid Saad is with the Bradley Department of Electrical and Computer En-
gineering, Virginia Tech, Alexandria, VA, 22305, USA, email: walids@vt.edu.
Eui-Nam Huh and Choong Seon Hong are with the Department of Com-
puter Science and Engineering, Kyung Hee University, Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-
do 17104, Rep. of Korea, emails: johnhuh@khu.ac.kr, cshong@khu.ac.kr.
beam directions to find the optimal alignment. Although this
approach is straightforward to implement, it can be inefficient
in rapidly changing environments, introducing considerable
overhead in terms of time and energy [3].
One promising approach for overcoming these limitations
is to leverage multimodal sensing-aided beam prediction using
data from sensors such as LiDAR, radar, GPS, and RGB cam-
eras to monitor user trajectories and network conditions [4]. By
incorporating this information, multimodal systems can forego
or accelerate sequential beam scanning, allowing quicker and
more flexible beam alignment with reduced overhead [5]. This
technique is well-suited for applications that require low la-
tency, such as autonomous driving and drone communications
[6]. As such, multimodal sensing-aided beam prediction is be-
coming an important technology for future wireless networks
[7]. However, designing practical multimodal sensing-aided
beam prediction approaches requires overcoming a number
of key challenges. First, deploying high-resolution sensors
such as LiDAR or high-frame rate cameras at every base
station is costly, and extensive use of cameras also raises
privacy concerns [8]. Second, large-scale transformer-based
fusion models are often needed to effectively leverage sensor
data, but they can be computationally heavy [9], [10]. Third,
creating comprehensive multimodal datasets is non-trivial, as
existing public datasets often lack certain sensing modalities
or have environment-specific constraints.
A. Prior Works
There has been a number of works that attempted to address
the aforementioned challenges [11]–[33], as detailed next.
1) Traditional Approaches for mmWave Beamforming:
Traditional beamforming in mmWave systems has largely
relied on exhaustive beam sweeping or heuristic codebook-
based methods [19]. Beam sweeping is the most established
beam optimization technique in mmWave communications,
in which the transmitter and receiver systematically scan
multiple beam directions to determine the one that provides
the highest signal strength [20]. In [21], the authors leveraged
simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) techniques
to significantly improve beam tracking and management in
mmWave systems by incorporating geometric consistency and
environmental features. Although straightforward to imple-
ment and effective in static or low-mobility environments,
beam sweeping can lead to considerable overhead and latency,
which becomes problematic in high-speed or rapidly varying
channels where real-time adaptability is essential [6]. To miti-
gate this issue, heuristic methods have also been explored, such
as codebook-based beam selection, where candidate beams
are rapidly identified, and greedy approaches that pick the
beam delivering the highest instantaneous signal strength [22].
Although relatively simple and intuitive, these methods do
not guarantee a global optimum and often fail in highly
dynamic environments [6]. Consequently, relying solely on
beam sweeping or heuristic approaches to overcome frequent
arXiv:2504.05187v2  [cs.NI]  1 Dec 2025
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
2
TABLE I: Typical measurement and simulation public datasets for multimodal wireless communication.
Dataset
Sensory data
Communication data
Weather
Multi-Scenario
Source
RGB
Depth map
LiDAR
Radar
mmWave
Massive MIMO
Sunny, rainy, snowy
DeepSense 6G [11]
✓
✗
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Measurement
WLADO [12]
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
Measurement
Vi-Fi [13]
✓
✓
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
Measurement
NEU [5]
✓
✗
✓
✗
✓
✓
✗
✓
Measurement
DeepMIMO [14]
✓
✓
✗
✓
✓
✗
✗
✗
Simulation
LASSE [15]
✓
✓
✓
✗
✓
✓
✗
✓
Simulation
ViWi [16]
✓
✓
✓
✗
✓
✓
✗
✓
Simulation
V2X-Sim [17]
✓
✓
✓
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
Simulation
e-Flash [18]
✓
✗
✓
✗
✓
✗
✗
✗
Simulation
blockages and severe path loss in mmWave systems can
lead to increased communication delays and increased energy
consumption, ultimately hampering the reliability of networks
that demand rapid and continuous beam adaptation [23].
2) Multimodal Sensing-aided Beam Prediction:
To address the challenges of mmWave beamforming, recent
studies propose to take advantage of sensor modalities such
as LiDAR, radar, GPS, and RGB cameras for more accu-
rate beamforming [24]–[30]. The works in [24]–[26] used
multimodal learning approaches that integrate LiDAR, radar,
RGB, and GPS data to improve beam prediction accuracy. In
[27], the authors proposed a deep quantum transformer net-
work that fuses multimodal sensing data for robust mmWave
beam prediction in integrated sensing and communication
systems, demonstrating notable performance gains in real-
world V2I scenarios. However, practical deployment of the
solutions in [25]–[27] is hindered by sensor cost, increased
computational complexity, and scalability concerns. Many
existing models [28]–[30] for beam prediction assume the
availability of various multimodal data, which may not be
feasible in real-world deployments where the infrastructure is
restricted to limited sensor modalities. In particular, current
LiDAR systems are often prohibitively expensive, and the
widespread deployment of cameras raises significant privacy
concerns. Moreover, while transformer architectures like the
ones used in [25]–[28] can handle numerous multimodal tasks,
they typically require significant computational resources to
achieve fast inference. Without such hardware, real-world base
stations cannot integrate such transformer-based solutions for
beamforming purposes.
3) Multimodal Datasets and Simulation Frameworks:
To effectively train multimodal beam prediction models,
comprehensive datasets containing multiple sensor modalities
along with corresponding beamforming information are re-
quired. Table I shows publicly available datasets for multi-
modal learning in wireless communications. Moreover, these
datasets can be broadly categorized into real-world and virtual
environment datasets, each with its own significant limita-
tions. In particular, publicly available datasets often lack
the comprehensive multimodal data necessary for effective
learning and evaluation. Among real-world datasets [5], [11]–
[13], very few comprehensively include LiDAR, radar, and
RGB data together. Hence, such approaches have very lim-
ited applicability in multimodal learning and sensor fusion
research. Furthermore, most datasets are designed with a
specific research focus, limiting their adaptability to explore
new communication paradigms beyond their original scope.
In addition, virtual environment datasets [14]–[18], often gen-
erated using network simulation tools such as MATLAB or
Sionna, differ significantly from real-world datasets in terms
of environmental complexity, sensor characteristics, and noise
Sionna
Physical Simulator
Network Simulator
Real Space
Virtual Space
Learning
Applying
Tuning
Fig. 1: Model training in a virtual environment that combines
multiple simulators.
modeling. These discrepancies reduce the generalizability of
models trained solely on synthetic data, making them less
effective in practical deployment scenarios.
To overcome these challenges, recent studies [31]–[33]
proposed a realistic multimodal simulation framework that
closely replicates real-world conditions in a virtual environ-
ment by integrating sensor data with beamforming informa-
tion. This framework bridges the gap between synthetic and
real-world datasets, enabling more robust and generalizable
multimodal learning models for beam prediction in next-
generation communication systems. To enhance the accuracy
and realism of the generated data, the realistic multimodal
simulation framework integrates an autonomous driving simu-
lation platform with network simulation tools, as illustrated in
Fig. 1. The authors in [31] proposed a multimodal simulation
framework for digital twin (DT) enabled vehicle-to-everything
(V2X) communications, using CARLA for realistic sensor
data generation and Remcom Wireless InSite for precise
ray-tracing-based wireless channel modeling, demonstrated
through a blockage handover task for V2X link restoration.
Similarly, the work in [32] introduced M3SC, a comprehensive
multimodal sensing-communication dataset, generated using
AirSim, WaveFarer, and Wireless InSite, effectively aligning
the physical space (LiDAR, RGB, radar) with the electro-
magnetic space (mmWave, channel impulse response (CIR)
matrices) under various weather conditions and frequency
bands. Furthermore, in [33], the authors developed MVX-
ViT, a co-simulation framework that integrates CARLA and
Sionna to generate a multimodal V2X dataset, enabling AI-
driven antenna position optimization. However, prior work has
largely focused on perception tasks and lacks comprehensive
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
3
experimentation on beamforming communication. To address
this limitation, we propose a realistic multimodal simulation
framework that combines CARLA with MATLAB, enabling
detailed and diverse experiments on multimodal sensing and
mmWave beamforming communication.
4) Knowledge Distillation for Resource-Efficient Learning:
Knowledge distillation (KD) compresses a high-capacity
teacher model into a lightweight student model by training
the student to mimic the teacher’s output, thus preserving
performance while significantly reducing computational re-
quirements [34]. This approach is particularly beneficial in
resource-constrained environments, such as edge devices or
mobile platforms, where large models are impractical due
to limited memory and power budgets. In standard KD, the
teacher’s probabilistic outputs (soft labels) guide the student,
allowing it to learn richer data distributions than is typically
possible with hard labels alone. Beyond logit-based distil-
lation, other KD variants include feature-based distillation,
which transfers intermediate representations, and relation-
based distillation, which preserves the structural relationships
between data points in the latent space of the teacher [35].
Although most KD methods assume that both the teacher
and the student share the same input modality, cross-modal
knowledge distillation (CKD) extends KD to allow knowledge
transfer between models trained in different sensor modalities
[36]. In [37], the authors proposed a teacher model trained on
LiDAR and RGB data that can transfer its learned representa-
tions to a student model using radar and RGB input, thereby
reducing the reliance on computationally expensive sensors
during inference. Similarly, other CKD approaches [38] and
[39] have been applied primarily to perception tasks such as
object detection or classification. Although these works [37]–
[39] demonstrate the potential of CKD for efficient inference,
it does not explore or address beamforming communication.
Thus, its applicability to real-time, resource-constrained beam
prediction in 6G networks remains limited. To address these
challenges, we investigate a radar-only student model for beam
prediction that benefits from cross-modal relational knowledge
distilled from transformer based multimodal teacher.
B. Contributions
The main contribution of this paper is a novel resource-
efficient learning approach based on Cross-modal Relational
Knowledge Distillation (CRKD) for optimal beam prediction
in a multi-vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) environment. We first
define the beam prediction problem, which aims to maximize
the received signal strength (RSS) between multiple vehi-
cles. To generate the necessary training data, we introduce
a realistic multimodal simulation framework that integrates
traditional communication tools (MATLAB) with autonomous
driving simulators (CARLA). This framework enables diverse
multimodal experiments using realistic sensor data. Using this
multimodal dataset, we propose a CRKD-based approach for
efficient radar-only beam prediction. Specifically, our method
transfers knowledge from a teacher network trained in mul-
tiple sensor modalities to a student network relying solely
on radar data. The evaluation results demonstrate that the
proposed CRKD-based model significantly improves the radar-
only beam prediction performance. In particular, the student
network substantially reduces the number of parameters com-
pared to the teacher network, highlighting the effectiveness
of our resource-efficient design. In summary, we make the
following key contributions:
• Multimodal realistic simulation framework: We integrate
CARLA (to generate diverse sensor data) and MATLAB
(to simulate mmWave channel communication) to create
a virtual environment that accurately reflects real-world
conditions, allowing robust performance evaluations.
• Cross-modal relational knowledge distillation: We in-
troduce a new beam prediction–specialized method that
transfers relational features from a multimodal teacher
model (trained with LiDAR, radar, GPS, and RGB)
to a student with only radar. This approach preserves
predictive accuracy while reducing sensor dependencies
and computational complexity.
• Analysis of generated multimodal data: We analyze the
generated dataset. This analysis reveals the specific char-
acteristics of the dataset, such as the distribution of
beam indices across the entire dataset and the increased
complexity of multi-lane scenarios with multiple strong
signal paths. These insights highlight key challenges
in beam prediction, such as dealing with skewed label
distributions and maintaining accuracy in environments
with higher multi-path variability.
• Extensive performance evaluation: We validate our ap-
proach using top-k accuracy, mean received signal
strength (RSS) and mean percentile rank (MPR) in urban
scenarios with multi-lane. Results show that our radar-
only student model achieves over 94% of the teacher
model’s accuracy with only 10% of the teacher network’s
parameters. This demonstrates that cross-modal distilla-
tion can effectively preserve predictive performance under
strict resource constraints, even in complex environments
with high multipath and mobility.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
introduces the proposed multimodal sensing-based beam pre-
diction system for multiple vehicles. Section III presents the
realistic multimodal simulation framework, which is designed
to generate multimodal sensing training data. In Section IV,
we propose CRKD for training a single-modal beam prediction
model. Section V analyzes the simulation results and, finally,
Section VI concludes the paper with key findings and future
directions.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
As illustrated in Fig. 2, we consider multimodal sensing-
based beam prediction for downlink mmWave communications
in multiple V2I environments, which consists of a mmWave
beamformer with a uniform rectangular array (URA) system
of N antennas and a set V of V vehicles, each with a single
antenna. The beamformer employs a predefined beam code-
book B = {c1, · · · , cB} of size B, where each cb corresponds
to a beam pattern realized by a weight vector wb ∈CN.
The beamformer selects the next optimal future beam index
using a deep neural network (DNN) based on the sensing data
from the previous observation window of size P. The sensing
information at the channel sampling interval t ∈T can be
written as X = {x[t −P + 1], · · · , x[t]}. We also consider two
types of beamformers with different sensing configurations:
• Multimodal Beamformer (equipped with LiDAR, radar,
GPS, and camera): This beamformer can extract rich en-
vironmental features such as 3D object shapes, distances,
velocity information, and approximate location coordi-
nates. This multimodal approach can produce highly ac-
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
4
Sensor
Sensing data
(𝑡1~𝑡5)
mmWave
Beamformer
Sensor
mmWave
Beamformer
LiDAR
Camera
Radar
GPS
Radar
Sensing data
(𝑡1~𝑡5)
Deep Neural Network
⋯
⋯
⋯
⋯
Deep Neural Network
⋯
⋯
⋯
⋯
Cross-modal
Knowledge Distillation
Fig. 2: System model for multi-beam prediction with cross-modal knowledge distillation.
curate beam predictions, but requires significant hardware
and computational resources.
• Radar-Only Beamformer: This is a beamformer that is
restricted to radar measurements, which are generally
lower-cost and robust under various environmental con-
ditions (e.g., fog, rain). However, it may lack certain
positional or visual details that LiDAR or cameras could
provide, potentially reducing its beam prediction accuracy
if used in isolation.
Despite these differences in sensing complexity, our goal is to
develop a learning-based beam prediction method that mini-
mizes performance loss when only radar sensing is available.
A. Network model
To model the characteristics of mmWave communica-
tion, we adopt a geometric ray-tracing-based channel frame-
work that captures sparse multipath, directional propagation,
and frequency-selective path loss. All path-level parameters
{βv,l, θl, ϕl, τl}L
l=1 are generated using MATLAB’s raytrace
function, which implements a 3D shoot–bounce–ray (SBR)
solver consistent with 3GPP TR 38.901. This setup includes
specular reflections, single-edge diffractions (up to order 2),
and realistic urban materials (e.g., concrete, glass, metal),
modeled in an urban microcell environment imported from
CARLA.
When applying a beamforming weight vector wb of a beam
pattern cb ∈B, the magnitude of the response of the array for
a vehicle v over the path l is calculated as:
Rtx
v,l(cb) = 10 log10
wH
b · av(θl, ϕl)
 ,
(1)
where av(θl, ϕl) ∈CN is the array response vector at
azimuth θl and elevation ϕl, and
H denotes the Hermitian
(conjugate transpose). This response reflects the directional
gain of the array for a specific path.
The total received signal strength (RSS) for vehicle v using
beam pattern cb is determined by aggregating contributions
from all L propagation paths, weighted by path losses:
Sv(cb) =
L
X
l=1

Rtx
v,l(cb) −P l
v

,
(2)
where P l
v represents the path loss of the l-th path. This
loss includes distance-based attenuation, material-dependent
reflection loss, and large-scale fading. A common empirical
model expresses this as follows:
P l
v(dB) = P0 + 10α log10(dv,l) + χσ,
(3)
where P0 is the reference path loss at 1 meter, α is the
path loss exponent, dv,l is the distance of the l-th path, and
χσ ∼N(0, σ2) models shadow effects.
In addition, the effective channel gain for each path includes
a carrier-dependent phase shift due to propagation delay τv,l,
expressed as:
hv,l =
p
βv,l e−j2πfcτv,l,
(4)
which is embedded in βv,l during the simulation. This realis-
tic channel model reflects the sparse, high-directivity nature of
mmWave environments and forms the foundation for evaluat-
ing beam prediction accuracy under our proposed knowledge
distillation framework. Importantly, this formulation ensures
that beam prediction models are trained and evaluated under
physically realistic and path-dependent conditions, allowing
them to learn angular selectivity and NLoS behavior intrinsic
to real-world mmWave propagation.
B. Problem statement
We will investigate how to effectively leverage the sensing
information obtained from the beamformer sensors for the
mmWave beam prediction problem. We aim to select an
optimal beam pattern cb from the candidate beams in the
codebook B that maximizes the sum of RSS of vehicles. In
a practical mmWave downlink scenario, the base station (or
beamformer) observes the dynamic environment and selects
the beam pattern cb to maximize received strength across
vehicles. For the effective channel hv of vehicle v, the weight
vector wb ∈CN in B should be chosen to achieve a high
inner product hH
v wb. The challenge is that hv evolves quickly
due to mobility, blockage, and reflections at mmWave fre-
quencies, leading to frequent re-selection of the beam pattern.
Exhaustive beam sweeping can be performed to identify c∗
b,
but this approach is time-consuming, particularly for large
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
5
Define physical environment 
with Sensor & Tx/Rx
Define wireless environment 
with Millimeter Antenna
Multimodal Learning
Physical Simulation
Sensing Data
(LiDAR, Radar, RGB)
Wireless Simulation
Communication Data
(Ray, RSS, Beam info)
Current State
(Position,
Rotation)
Generate
Current
Scene
Fig. 3: Multimodal realistic simulation framework based on
autonomous driving tool CARLA and MATLAB.
|B|. Therefore, sensing-aided beam prediction that uses radar,
LiDAR, GPS, or camera data can help to infer the optimal
beam directly from environmental observations. However, to
train learning models for beam prediction, we require compre-
hensive multimodal data, which we address in Section III.
Hence, our goal is to develop a deep learning framework
capable of predicting beams using the collected sensory data
X. We consider two different models: one that uses multimodal
sensing data and another that relies on radar only. The intended
output of these deep learning models is a probability distri-
bution p = [p1, p2, . . . , pB] over the beamforming codebook
B. The beam pattern predicted by the model with the highest
prediction probability is given by:
ˆb = arg
B
max
b
pb.
(5)
For multi-vehicle scenarios, one may sum or average RSSv(cb)
across all vehicles v ∈{1, . . . , V } to evaluate the utility of
each beam pattern for the entire coverage area. Identifying
the index corresponding to the highest sum of RSS across
multiple vehicles, the optimal beam pattern is given by:
b∗= arg
B
max
cb
V
X
v=1
Sv(cb).
(6)
which gives us the beam pattern cb that maximizes the cumu-
lative signal strength across all vehicles.
The beam prediction model f(·) is parameterized by a set of
parameters Θ. These parameters are learned from the training
dataset {X, b∗} at the channel sampling interval t, which
contains the sensing information along with the correspond-
ing optimal beam patterns. Consequently, the optimization
problem predicting the beam for the future channel sampling
interval t + 1 can be written as [8]:
f ∗(X, t+1; Θ∗) = arg max
f(·),Θ
P {f(X, t + 1; Θ) = b∗[t + 1]} . (7)
The prediction models are referred to as fmulti(·) with pa-
rameter Θmulti, which uses multimodal sensing information, and
fmono(·), which uses radar-only sensing information, depending
on the type of sensor used. Next, we present how to generate
training data and learn multimodal models.
III. MULTIMODAL REALISTIC SIMULATION FRAMEWORK
FOR SENSING-AIDED COMMUNICATION
We now present a realistic multimodal simulation frame-
work designed to generate multimodal sensor data and perform
wireless communication experiments in a detailed virtual
urban environment. Fig. 3 illustrates the workflow of the
proposed framework. We use the autonomous driving tool
CARLA [40] to generate realistic sensing information, while
MATLAB [41] is used for communication experiments. Next,
we describe the overall workflow, including procedures for
sensor data generation and digital environment reconstruction.
We then discuss how the reconstructed environment supports
multimodal sensor simulation and ray-tracing-based channel
generation, ultimately producing the data required for cross-
modal knowledge distillation.
The proposed framework consists of four main stages:
environment setup, sensing data generation, 3D map recon-
struction, and wireless channel simulation. By integrating
CARLA’s robust vehicular and sensor modeling capabilities
with MATLAB’s communication toolboxes, we ensure realis-
tic modeling of both sensor signals and mmWave propagation
characteristics.
Environment Setup: To simulate realistic urban scenarios,
we place multiple vehicles and one or more base stations
within the CARLA environment. The built-in traffic control
and navigation functions of CARLA govern the autonomous
movements of these vehicles, adhering to traffic signals, speed
limits, and road geometry. This configuration provides dy-
namic mobility patterns and a diverse range of sensing condi-
tions to evaluate beamforming and channel characteristics:
• Base Station Placement: We position the base station(s)
at fixed points, such as roadside units or rooftop instal-
lations, consistent with typical urban deployments.
• Vehicle Distribution: Vehicles are spawned in random
locations or traffic centers, allowing a variety of relative
positions and velocities for a more comprehensive data
collection.
• Environmental Dynamics: Here, changes in lighting,
weather, and traffic density have been introduced to sim-
ulate different conditions (e.g., night, fog, heavy traffic).
Sensing Data Generation: To capture the information re-
quired for subsequent communication analysis, we instantiate
multiple sensors at the base station, as well as in vehicles if
needed. Using CARLA’s APIs, we configure sensor modalities
such as:
• LiDAR: It generates 3D point clouds, providing high-
resolution distance and object shape information.
• Radar: It offers lower-resolution distance and velocity
measurements, robust in adverse weather or lighting
conditions.
• RGB Cameras: It provides rich color image data for vi-
sual context (e.g. obstacle detection, object classification).
• GPS: It logs positional coordinates and velocities.
This multimodal data captures the dynamic movement of
vehicles and environmental details such as buildings, roads,
and other objects. Then, all sensing data are synchronized in
time, ensuring consistent data alignment across LiDAR, radar,
and camera outputs.
Digital 3D Reconstruction: Although CARLA renders a
realistic environment for autonomous driving simulations, it
is required MATLAB for the compatible 3D model format
to conduct wireless channel simulations. To harmonize these
platforms, we perform a conversion of the CARLA maps using
Blender API:
• Map Export and Conversion: We export the CARLA
environment, including roads and buildings, into an in-
termediate 3D file format (e.g., FBX or OBJ).
• Scripting in Blender: The Blender API is used for script-
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
6
ing the conversion process, ensuring that the geometry,
coordinates of the texture, and scale of the model are
preserved.
• MATLAB Import: The resulting 3D file is then imported
into MATLAB, generating a mesh-based environment
consistent with the virtual scene in CARLA.
This process guarantees that the geometry, dimensions, and
layout remain accurate on both simulation platforms.
Wireless Channel Simulation: After importing the 3D en-
vironment into MATLAB, we perform ray-tracing-based wire-
less channel simulations to capture the propagation character-
istics of mmWave. By tracing signal paths, reflections, diffrac-
tions, and line-of-sight (LoS) or non-line-of-sight (NLoS)
components, we gain detailed insights into how each beam
pattern interacts with the reconstructed urban scene. Specifi-
cally:
• Ray-Tracing Algorithm: Multiple rays are cast from the
base station in different directions, and their interactions
with objects are calculated based on reflection, scattering,
or diffraction coefficients.
• Beam Pattern Evaluation: The received signal strength
(RSS) is evaluated for each codebook beam at various
vehicle positions, creating a labeled dataset linking spatial
and sensing data to channel observations.
• Dynamic Updates: As vehicles move, updated positional
data from CARLA can be used to re-simulate or predict
channel states, thus creating a time-series dataset of
multimodal sensing and wireless measurements.
We integrate the multimodal sensor data obtained from
CARLA with the corresponding RSS and channel parameters
from the MATLAB ray-tracing simulations. This fused dataset
includes:
• Sensor Streams (LiDAR, radar, RGB, GPS): High-
dimensional observations of the environment.
• Channel State Information (Ray-Tracing): Path loss, de-
lay spread, angle of arrival (AoA), angle of departure
(AoD), and RSS for each beam pattern.
• Temporal and Positional Labels: Timestamps, vehicle IDs
and spatial coordinates to enable sequential or spatial
modeling.
These data are the foundation for training and validating
beam prediction algorithms, including the proposed cross-
modal knowledge distillation approach.
In summary, the proposed multimodal simulation frame-
work (Fig. 3) seamlessly integrates autonomous driving and
wireless communication simulations by generating dynamic
and realistic urban scenarios through CARLA’s traffic control
and sensor suite, reconstructing the resulting 3D environment
in MATLAB for accurate ray-tracing analysis, and creation
of a comprehensive dataset that encompasses both sensor
observations and channel measurements. This unified approach
lays the foundation for rigorous performance evaluation of
sensing-aided beam prediction and enables advanced methods
such as cross-modal knowledge distillation, which leverages
rich multimodal data during training while reducing sensor
dependencies at inference.
IV. CROSS-MODAL RELATIONAL KNOWLEDGE
DISTILLATION FROM MULTIMODAL TO MONOMODAL
As illustrated in Fig. 4, our objective is to distill the
knowledge from a teacher network trained on multimodal
sensing information (LiDAR, radar, GPS, and RGB) into a
student network that relies only on radar data. Our teacher
model uses a transformer-based sensor fusion (with a ResNet
backbone for images), resulting in 105 million parameters.
In contrast, the student network is a radar-only multilayer
perceptron (MLP) with 13 million parameters. In this section,
we outline the preprocessing steps for the multimodal data and
the training process of the teacher network. We then describe
how the student network is trained using our cross-modal
knowledge distillation.
A. Multimodal preprocessing
The teacher network, captured by fmulti(·), has four sensor
modalities: LiDAR, radar, GPS, and RGB images. Each sensor
type is pre-processed in a format that can be consistently fed
into subsequent encoders:
• LiDAR (Bird’s-Eye View (BEV)): Raw LiDAR point
clouds
x, y, z, intensity
 are projected onto a 2D plane
to form a BEV representation. This transformation high-
lights object occupancy and relative positioning in a top-
down image layout, filtering out ground reflections, and
simplifying 3D geometry into 2D grids.
• Radar (Highest Point Sampling (HPS)): To handle radar
data
velocity, azimuth, altitude, depth
, we apply HPS,
which downsamples radar point clouds to a fixed size,
while ensuring consistency across different sampling in-
tervals or noise conditions.
• GPS: GPS coordinates are recorded as numerical features.
These can be fed into fully connected layers or concate-
nated with other high-level features to enrich the spatial
context.
• RGB Images: Camera images are processed with a stan-
dard 2D convolutional neural network (CNN), such as a
ResNet block, producing visual feature maps that capture
color and texture information.
B. Learning of the teacher network
1) Transformer-Based Fusion:
After separate backbone encoders extract the LiDAR/RGB
and radar/GPS features, the resulting embeddings are fused
using a Transformer module that captures cross-modal corre-
lations:
• Image-Based Encoding: LiDAR-BEV and RGB image
features each pass through their own CNN backbone
(e.g., ResNet). The output feature maps are flattened or
pooled and then fed into a Transformer that learns global
correlations among spatial patches.
• Point-Based Encoding: Radar and GPS data undergo an
attention-based layer to compress point-wise features,
followed by an attention layer and a linear layer to reduce
dimensionality. These intermediate embeddings are then
processed by the same (or parallel) Transformer to align
with the image-based features.
By applying multi-head attention to the connected tokens of
LiDAR, radar, RGB, and GPS, the Transformer separates
and merges point-based and image-based data, resulting in a
unified multimodal representation Zmulti that provides greater
awareness of the environment.
2) Beam Prediction and Focal Loss:
The fused representation Zmulti is finally passed to a pre-
diction layer to output a probability distribution on the beam-
forming codebook B. The prediction model fmulti(·) uses a
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
7
LiDAR
RGB
Radar
GPS
Pre-
Processing
Pre-
Processing
Prediction
Model
(MLP)
Radar
Pre-
Processing
Encoding Layer
(MLP)
Prediction
Model
(MLP)
Prediction
Result
Prediction
Result
Teacher model with multi modal sensing
Student model with radar-only
Output
layer
Latent
layer
CNN
CNN
CNN
CNN
Pool
CNN
CNN
CNN
CNN
Pool
Transformer
Transformer
Attention
Attention
Embedding
Embedding
Pool
Pool
Transformer
Transformer
Resnet 18
Resnet 34
Parameter: 105M
Parameter: 13M
Fig. 4: The proposed structure of cross-modal knowledge distillation from multimodal (LiDAR, RGB, radar, and GPS) to
monomodal (radar).
focal loss function and uses stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
for optimization. Focal loss is a modification of the standard
cross-entropy loss designed to address the class imbalance
problem. In datasets with imbalanced classes, the majority
class can dominate the loss, leading to poor performance for
the minority class. The focal loss function is formulated as
follows:
Lfocal = −
 1 −pb∗γ log
 pb∗
,
(8)
where pb is the predicted probability of selecting beam cb. b∗
is the ground-truth beam index (i.e., the beam maximizing
the sum-RSS), and γ = 2 is a focusing parameter in our
experiments. In highly imbalanced datasets where certain
beams dominate, the focal loss ensures more attention is given
to challenging samples. The teacher network uses only the
focal loss in (8) as a loss function.
C. Learning of the student network
The student network, fmono(·), operates exclusively on radar
input. The student network is a feedforward multilayer percep-
tron (MLP) with roughly 13 million parameters by default.
The MLP of the student consists of 6 fully connected layers
with ReLU activations. This monomodal design reduces sensor
and computational overhead, but naturally yields less environ-
mental awareness than the multimodal teacher. Training fmono
purely with a label-based loss often leads to suboptimal beam
predictions. Hence, we apply KD framework to significantly
enhance the student’s performance while reducing the overall
model size.
1) Conventional Knowledge Distillation:
Conventional KD aims to transfer knowledge from the
teacher to the student network by minimizing the loss of
distillation. The distillation loss is calculated based on the
difference between the features of the teacher and student
networks. To calculate this difference, the conventional KD
methods use the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, which is
a statistical measure that quantifies how a feature distribution
Fmono of the student network differs from a feature distribution
Fmulti of the teacher network. For two feature distributions P
and Q, the KL divergence is calculated as [42]:
Lkl(P||Q) = −T 2
F
X
f=1
σ(P) log
σ(P)
σ(Q)

,
(9)
where T is the temperature to control the distribution over fea-
tures, to essentially smooth the distribution, thereby capturing
the nuanced relationships between different features as learned
by the teacher network. In our experiments, we set T = 2. F is
the total number of features. σ(z) = ezi/P
j ezj is the softmax
function, where zi is the i-th element of the input vector z.
To obtain more fine-grained knowledge from the teacher
network, we incorporate not only the loss based on the
final output features F end but also an additional loss term
derived from the difference between the latent features Fmid
in the encoding layers. As a result, the overall loss for the
student network, including both the original label loss and the
distillation loss, can be calculated as:
Lkd = (1 −α)Lfocal + α
X
l∈{mid, end}
Lkl

f (l)
t , f (l)
s

,
(10)
where α is a weight parameter that balances the importance
of the original loss and the distillation loss. f (l)
t
and f (l)
s
are
the teacher and student feature maps at layer l.
2) Relational Knowledge Distillation:
While conventional KD focuses on aligning outputs or
feature representations on a per-sample basis, relational knowl-
edge distillation (RKD) goes a step further by preserving
pairwise relationships between samples in the feature space.
This approach is especially beneficial in cross-modal knowl-
edge distillation, where the teacher model operates on richer
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
8
Teacher
Model
Student
Model
𝒓𝐞𝐮𝐜
𝒓𝐜𝐨𝐬
𝒓𝐡𝐲𝐩
𝑳𝐦𝐚𝐧𝐢𝐟𝐨𝐥𝐝
Mapping to Manifold
Mapping to Manifold
(a) Manifold-Based Relationship.
Teacher
Model
Student
Model
Probability Distribution
Probability Distribution
𝑳𝐬𝐭𝐫𝐞𝐞𝐢𝐧𝐠
(b) Beam Steering based Relationship.
Fig. 5: Relational Knowledge Distillation with different relationships.
multimodal data while the student has access to only a single
modality (i.e., radar). In our framework, we implement two
methods of relational knowledge distillation: (a) a manifold-
based loss that aligns the latent feature geometry between
teacher and student, and (b) a novel beam steering-based
loss that captures the relational structure in the complex-
valued beamspace at the output level. These complementary
losses enable the student to better mimic the teacher’s internal
representations and output behaviors under sensor constraints.
a) Manifold-Based Relationship Measures:
To extract deep features from various relationships of the
latent layer, we adopted a method called DistilVPR [43].
To capture higher-order relationships between feature embed-
dings, DistilVPR computes pairwise distances or similarities
in three distinct manifolds: Euclidean (flat), spherical (positive
curvature), and hyperbolic (negative curvature). For any two
feature vectors ti and tj, we denote:
reuc(ti, tj),
rcos(ti, tj),
rhyp(ti, tj).
The Euclidean distance (or ℓ2) is the most common metric
to measure pairwise dissimilarity in a flat manifold as follows:
reuc(ti, tj) =
ti −tj

2 =
v
u
u
t
D
X
d=1
 ti,d −tj,d
2,
(11)
where ti, tj ∈RD and D is the feature dimension. In the
context of knowledge distillation, matching these Euclidean
distances in the teacher and student feature spaces ensures
that if two samples (i, j) are close in the teacher’s embed-
dings, they remain close in the student’s embeddings. While
Euclidean distance captures raw feature differences, the cosine
similarity is more sensitive to angular relationships and is often
interpreted as measuring distance on a spherical manifold. To
explore the spherical-based relationship, the cosine distance is
given by:
rcos(ti, tj) =
⟨ti, tj⟩
∥ti∥∥tj∥,
(12)
where ⟨·, ·⟩represents the inner (dot) product. In practice, one
may use 1 −rcos as a distance-like measure. Cosine-based
relationships are useful when the magnitude of vectors is less
important than their direction, a scenario common in classifi-
cation or retrieval tasks. We incorporate a hyperbolic measure
using the Poincar´e ball model to capture hierarchical or tree-
like structures and negative curvature. When ti, tj ∈RD, we
can project each vector onto the Poincare space DD
c
(with
curvature parameter c > 0) via an exponential mapping as
follows:
t(hyp)
i
= expc
0(ti) = tanh
√c ∥ti∥

ti
√c ∥ti∥.
(13)
Given two hyperbolic embeddings t(hyp)
i
, t(hyp)
j
∈DD
c , their
hyperbolic distance rhyp(·, ·) is computed as:
rhyp
 ti, tj

= dhyp

t(hyp)
i
, t(hyp)
j

=
2
√c arctanh
√c
 −t(hyp)
i
⊕c t(hyp)
j


,
(14)
where ⊕c is the M¨obius addition in the Poincar´e ball. The
negative curvature of hyperbolic space often helps preserve
hierarchical relationships in feature embeddings. We then
compare these teacher relations to the corresponding student
relations, e.g., reuc(si, sj). One can define a relational loss over
all pairs (i, j) as:
Llatent-rel =
B
X
i,j=1
h
d
 reuc(ti, tj), reuc(si, sj)

+ d
 rcos(ti, tj), rcos(si, sj)

+ d
 rhyp(ti, tj), rhyp(si, sj)
i
,
(15)
where d(·, ·) is a distance or divergence. This ensures that
the student maintains the geometry of the higher order of the
teacher, even if the absolute feature values differ because the
teacher sees more modalities.
b) Beam Steering based Relationship Measures:
In addition to the latent space structure, we propose a novel
relational distillation loss in the output domain by leverag-
ing the domain-specific properties of mmWave beamforming.
Each predicted beam index corresponds to a complex-valued
steering vector, which defines the phase alignment of signals
transmitted across antenna elements. These vectors capture the
directionality of beamforming and inherently encode spatial
relationships between users or signal paths. Since steering vec-
tors represent spatial directionality, aligning their pairwise sim-
ilarities enables the student to learn beam-space relationships
that are critical for mmWave propagation, where multipath
components and direction selectivity play a dominant role in
determining communication performance.
To preserve the relational structure of the beamspace, we
compute a similarity matrix using the Hermitian inner product
between normalized steering vectors. For two predicted beam
indices ˆbi and ˆbj from the teacher model, their similarity is
defined as:
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
9
s(T )
i,j =

w(ˆbi)†w(ˆbj)
∥w(ˆbi)∥· ∥w(ˆbj)∥
 ,
(16)
where w(ˆbi) ∈CN is the steering vector for the beam index
ˆbi, † denotes the Hermitian (conjugate transpose), and N is the
number of antenna elements. The same operation is performed
for the predicted beams of the student to yield s(S)
i,j .
We then define a beamspace relational loss to align the
structural similarities of beam directions between teacher and
student:
Loutput-rel =
B
X
i,j=1

s(T )
i,j −s(S)
i,j
2
,
(17)
where B is the batch size. This loss ensures that, even
without direct access to multimodal inputs, the radar-only
student can mimic the teacher’s understanding of directional
similarity across samples. In scenarios with domain shifts
or multiple strong paths, preserving this angular relational
structure is critical for robust beam prediction. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first application of relational
knowledge distillation based on complex-valued beam steering
vector similarities for mmWave communication. While prior
work like DistilVPR focuses on latent space geometry, our
proposed loss explicitly leverages directional structure at the
output level, a domain-specific innovation tailored to beam-
forming systems under sensor constraints. Consequently, we
can replace the conventional KD term in (10) with relational
loss as:
Lrkd = (1 −α) Lfocal + α(Llatent-rel + Loutput-rel),
(18)
Similar to the conventional KD loss function (10), the parame-
ter α balances the importance between the original supervised
loss and the relational distillation losses.
V. SIMULATION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
A simulation-based dataset was generated using the ‘Town
10’ map in CARLA, designed to resemble an urban envi-
ronment with up to 40 vehicles moving along 2-Lane or 3-
Lane roads. Each scenario (2-Lane or 3-Lane) comprises 50
episodes, spanning a maximum of 200 time steps sampled at
100 ms intervals. This setup produces 18, 823 time samples
(9, 073 in the 2-Lane scenario and 9, 750 in the 3-Lane sce-
nario). To introduce additional variation, the simulation adjusts
the time of day and weather: 30 episodes occur at noon, 10
at night, and the remaining 10 episodes feature rain or fog
in equal proportions. Figure 6 provides example RGB frames
that illustrate these conditions.
We train the networks in 70% of the generated samples,
evaluated in 15%, and tested the remaining 15%. All results
are reported in the test set. We implemented our models in
PyTorch. The teacher network was trained for 50 epochs with
a batch size of 64 and an initial learning rate of 5 × 10−4 with
the learning rate decayed by an absolute amount of 5×10−6 per
epoch. A learning rate decay starts at epoch 15, and a restart
interval is applied every 10 epochs. The student was trained
for 50 epochs in the same settings. We set the loss weight
of the distillation α = 0.5. Within this virtual environment, a
sensing-aided beamformer is used to serve the vehicles, and
152 distinct beam patterns are defined to cover both single-
beam and multi-beam configurations of up to three beams.
Each beam pattern spans an elevation angle of 70◦and an
azimuth angle of 180◦. At each time step, the beam pattern that
maximizes the average received signal strength (RSS) across
multiple vehicles is designated as optimal. In order to assess
the performance of our beam prediction model from multiple
perspectives, we employ three distinct metrics: Top-k accuracy,
mean received signal strength (RSS) and the mean percentile
rank (MPR).
1) Top-k Accuracy: This metric checks whether the optimal
beam y appears among the top candidates k predicted accord-
ing to the model’s probability distribution p. Topk(p) is the set
of beam indices with the highest probabilities k in p. Formally,
we can express Top-k Accuracy as follows:
Top-k Accuracy = 1
N
N
X
n=1
I

y(n) ∈Topk
 p(n)
,
(19)
where N is the total number of test samples, and I(·) is an
indicator function that returns 1 if the condition is true and
0 otherwise. A higher Top-k value indicates that the model’s
probability distribution consistently assigns high scores to the
correct beam within its top predictions.
2) Mean RSS: Once the model selects ˆy as the predicted
beam index, the system applies the corresponding beamformer,
resulting in a received signal strength S(ˆy). We define the mean
RSS as the average RSS achieved over the test set as follows:
S = 1
N
N
X
n=1
S

ˆy(n)
.
(20)
A higher value of S implies that the beam prediction model
more often aligns with beam patterns maximizing signal
strength across diverse scenarios.
3) Mean Percentile Rank (MPR): The percentage rank offers
another view of the prediction quality by examining the rank
of the predicted beam among all B beams in terms of the
actual RSS performance. We define the rank of ˆy as:
rank
 ˆy

= 1 +
B
X
b=1
I

S(b) > S(ˆy)

,
(21)
so that a rank of 1 indicates the best (highest RSS) beam. We
convert this rank to a percentile by:
Percentile(ˆy) = B −rank(ˆy) + 1
B
,
(22)
which ranges from 0 to 1. The MPR over the test set can be
written as:
MPR = 1
N
N
X
n=1
Percentile

ˆy(n)
.
(23)
MPR essentially measures how close the chosen beam is to
optimal in terms of percentile. An MPR of 100% means the
top-ranked beam was always chosen, whereas lower values
indicate the prediction often fell short of the best beam. This
measure is particularly useful when analyzing how close the
prediction is to the truly optimal beam in a ranked sense, rather
than a strict “correct vs. incorrect” classification.
A. Dataset Analysis
As shown in Fig. 7, the most frequently chosen beam
indices tend to be single-beam solutions, especially in the
2-Lane scenario, where line of sight or partial visibility to
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
10
(a) RGB samples of camera sensors in the 2-Lane scenario.
(b) RGB samples of camera sensors in the 3-Lane scenario.
Fig. 6: RGB samples of camera sensors by episode type.
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Optimal Beam Index
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
Average Received Signal Strength (dBm)
(a) Distribution of 2-Lane Scenario.
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
Average Received Signal Strength (dBm)
Optimal Beam Index
(b) Distribution of 3-Lane Scenario.
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Optimal Beam Index
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
Average Received Signal Strength (dBm)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
(c) Distribution of all dataset.
Fig. 7: Analysis of distributions of the generated dataset.
Histogram of Optimal Beam Index
0
50
100
150
Optimal Beam Index
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Frequency
Histogram of Average RSS (dBm)
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
Average Received Signal Strength (dBm)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Frequency
Fig. 8: Distribution analysis of the generated dataset.
one dominant path is more likely. Although 3-Lane roads
lead to more multibeam usage, single-beam choices remain
prevalent. This indicates that in many time steps, one beam
is sufficient to cover the dominant paths and using additional
beams (while possible) does not substantially increase RSS.
Hence, the optimal solution skews toward single beams. Multi-
beam patterns are only chosen when vehicles or obstructions
create multiple equally strong paths that a single beam cannot
cover. The distribution of optimal beams in these experiments
illustrates that multi-beam patterns, notably those with three
closely spaced beams, are seldom chosen as they do not
substantially improve average RSS compared to strong single-
beam alignments.
Figure 8 further shows a skew in the usage of beam
indexes: certain indices appear far more frequently than others,
indicating an inherent label imbalance. This imbalance reflects
practical conditions where one or two strong angles can
dominate the channel environment, rendering most other beam
patterns suboptimal. This outcome highlights a key training
consideration for learning-based beam prediction since models
must handle real-world datasets where some classes (i.e.,
certain beam indices) are heavily favored.
B. Beam Prediction Accuracy
Table II summarizes the performance of cross-modal knowl-
edge distillation for beam prediction. The Teacher network, a
transformer-based model trained on multimodal sensing input
(LiDAR, radar, GPS, and RGB), achieves the highest-rank
accuracies of 92.17%, 84.36%, and 88.41% in the scenarios
tested. The 3-Lane scenario, having more complex multipath
conditions, naturally results in lower accuracy across all mod-
els (Teacher’s MPR drops by approximately 8 points compared
to the 2-Lane scenario), highlighting the added difficulty. The
WithoutKD model is a radar-only MLP network without any
distillation. The WithoutKD model reaches 84.12%, 78.29%,
and 82.02%, demonstrating a lower performance than Teacher.
This gap underscores the value of multimodal sensor data in
guiding beam selection. We apply distillation at two levels of
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
11
TABLE II: Learning results of cross-modal relational knowledge distillation between models with the same training data (2-
Lane, 3-Lane, All).
Scenarios
Methods
2-Lane
3-Lane
All
Latent
Output
MPR (%)
RSS (dBm)
MPR (%)
RSS (dBm)
MPR (%)
RSS (dBm)
Teacher (105M)
92.172
-77.753
84.362
-84.148
88.410
-81.276
WithoutKD (13M)
84.120
-82.407
78.288
-86.803
80.644
-84.827
KLdiv
-
83.776
-82.561
78.293
-86.615
82.019
-84.538
KD
-
KLdiv
84.426
-82.322
79.503
-86.551
82.783
-84.412
KLdiv
KLdiv
86.329
-81.399
79.860
-86.155
82.336
-84.209
manifold
-
86.998
-81.266
79.525
-86.395
83.551
-84.006
-
manifold
85.844
-81.627
79.707
-86.323
83.463
-84.158
RKD
manifold
manifold
87.210
-81.084
80.101
-85.708
83.658
-83.603
-
beamStr
87.185
-80.690
80.902
-85.624
83.276
-83.979
manifold
beamStr
87.502
-80.610
81.116
-85.534
83.972
-83.526
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Top-K Accuracy (%)
Teacher
sRKD
mRKD
KD
WithoutKD
K=1
K=5
K=10
Fig. 9: Comparative analysis of Top-K (1,5,10) prediction accuracy across models trained with all datasets.
TABLE III: Comparison of MPR (%) with and without RKD
across different student model sizes.
Model Size
Without KD
With RKD
Gain
Student-S (6M)
83.27
86.77
+3.50
Student-M (13M)
84.20
87.50
+3.30
Student-L (34M)
86.36
88.45
+2.09
TABLE IV: Comparison of model complexity and inference
latency across platforms.
Model
#Params
FLOPs
GPU
CPU1
CPU2
(ms)
(ms)
(ms)
Teacher
105.6M
20.3G
24.52
30.03
946.18
Student-L
34.2M
34.2M
0.66
0.99
7.99
Student-M
13.6M
13.6M
0.73
1.10
4.93
Student-S
6.8M
6.8M
0.59
1.04
2.21
the network: the latent layer (the latent features, e.g. after the
encoder or Transformer module) and the output layer (the final
output logits before the softmax). Among the standard KD
baselines (using KL divergence), KD (KLdiv+KLdiv) reaches
up to 86.32%, 79.86%, and 82.34% but still underperforms
compared to the RKD approaches. In the RKD section, various
combinations of latent- and output-level relation transfer are
explored: RKD (manifold+beamStr) achieves the highest stu-
dent performance, with an MPR of 87.50% on the 2-Lane and
83.97% in the overall dataset. This configuration also yields
the best RSS values (e.g. −80.61 dBm in 2-Lane), confirming
its superior beam selection accuracy. The improvement of
RKD over traditional KD methods illustrates the importance of
transferring structured relationships, especially those based on
beamforming-specific steering vector similarities (beamStr).
Overall, these results indicate that even a radar-only student
network can achieve high accuracy if it benefits from cross-
modal distillation of teacher feature relationships. In practical
terms, this finding suggests that a small, cost-effective net-
work, limited to radar sensing for real-time inference, can still
approximate the performance of a more complex multimodal
teacher.
Fig. 9 illustrates the Top-K prediction accuracy (K
=
1, 5, 10) across five different models trained using all datasets.
The baseline WithoutKD (radar-only MLP without distillation)
shows the lowest performance across all K values, reflecting
the limitations of lightweight monomodal learning. The KD
model refers to conventional knowledge distillation using KL
divergence at both the latent and output layers (KD (KL-
div+KLdiv)). The KD improves the accuracy of Top-1 and
Top-10 compared to baseline, but remains less effective in
capturing spatial beam relationships. The mRKD model rep-
resents relational knowledge distillation applied to both latent
features (RKD (manifold+manifold), while sRKD applies RKD
jointly on latent and output-level beam steering representations
(RKD (manifold+beamStr)). Among the two, sRKD achieves
superior performance, especially in Top-1 and Top-5 metrics,
highlighting the benefit of beam-aware similarity modeling in
the output space. The Teacher model, trained on full multi-
modal input with transformer architecture, achieves the highest
overall accuracy, serving as an upper bound. However, sRKD
narrows the performance gap in Top-10 accuracy while main-
taining a lightweight radar-only architecture, demonstrating
the effectiveness of beam-aware relational distillation under
resource constraints.
Table III compares the performance of RKD in different
model sizes for the student network. The results indicate that
as the MLP architecture of the student grows, the overall pre-
cision increases both for the baseline approach (WithoutKD)
and the relational distillation approach (RKD). However, the
relative improvement over KD is more pronounced in smaller
student networks. In other words, while RKD achieves greater
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
12
TABLE V: Comparison of beam prediction results under domain-same (2-Lane) and domain-shift (3-Lane to 2-Lane) scenarios.
Domain Same (2-Lane)
Domain Shift (3-Lane to 2-Lane)
2-Lane
2-Lane
3-Lane
Average
Methods
MPR (%)
RSS (dBm)
MPR (%)
RSS (dBm)
MPR (%)
RSS (dBm)
MPR (%)
RSS (dBm)
Teacher
92.172
-77.753
85.496
-81.782
84.362
-84.148
84.929
-82.965
WithoutKD
84.199
-82.406
53.307
-94.567
78.287
-86.802
65.797
-90.685
sRKD
87.502
-80.610
54.781
-94.088
81.115
-85.625
67.802
-90.177
mRKD
85.329
-81.889
55.037
-93.998
80.101
-85.708
66.838
-90.383
KD
84.849
-82.121
54.901
-94.007
79.860
-86.155
66.348
-90.476
absolute accuracy with larger models, the performance gap be-
tween WithoutKD and RKD is notably greater when the student
model is small. This suggests that knowledge distillation can
be especially advantageous in resource-constrained scenarios,
where the student network is required to maintain a low param-
eter count while striving to approximate the performance of a
significantly more complex multimodal teacher. Consequently,
compact radar-only models can benefit substantially from
cross-modal distillation, realizing stronger beam prediction
capabilities without incurring the computational overhead that
larger networks demand.
C. Resource Efficiency Analysis
Table IV presents a comparison of model size, FLOPs, and
inference latency for teacher and three student variants on three
hardware platforms: a GPU (NVIDIA RTX 4070), a desktop
CPU (AMD Ryzen 7 7800X3D @ 4.2GHz) and a mobile CPU
(Intel i7-10510U @ 1.8GHz). While the teacher model, based
on a Transformer architecture, incurs high computational cost
(20.3G FLOPs) and latency up to 946.18ms on mobile CPUs,
the student models are designed with lightweight MLPs. As a
result, their FLOPs closely match their parameter counts (e.g.
Student-S: 6.8M parameters ≈6.8M FLOPs), enabling sig-
nificant speed up during inference. In particular, the smallest
student model achieves 0.59ms on GPU and 1.04ms on CPU1,
satisfying the sub-1ms latency target for 5G/6G beamform-
ing, especially under ultra-reliable low-latency communication
(URLLC) requirements. Moreover, given that standard 5G NR
beam sweeping takes approximately 20ms, our method pro-
vides over 30× faster inference with competitive accuracy. This
indicates the practical deployability of our method for real-
time mmWave beam prediction on edge and mobile devices,
without compromising performance.
D. Limitations under Domain Shift and Future Directions
In addition to evaluating performance under matched train-
ing and testing domains, we also investigate a domain-shift
scenario to assess how well knowledge distillation withstands
different environmental conditions. Specifically, the teacher
network is trained on a 2-Lane dataset and then used to
distill knowledge into a student network trained on a 3-Lane
dataset. After this cross-domain distillation, the student model
is evaluated in both the 2-Lane and 3-Lane test sets. Table V
presents the beam prediction performance in both domain-
matched (2-Lane) and domain-shifted scenarios, where the
student model is trained on 3-Lane data and tested on 2-Lane
and 3-Lane environments. The teacher model, trained on 2-
Lane data, is also evaluated on both test sets for comparison.
The Domain Shift setting specifically examines how well
the student generalizes when trained and tested in different
environments. The results show a noticeable drop in student
performance (of up to 32.72%) under domain shift, especially
in the 2-Lane test set, indicating limited generalization capac-
ity. This performance degradation is more severe for the radar-
only student due to its lower model capacity and restricted
sensor input. In contrast, the multimodal teacher, with richer
inputs and a transformer-based architecture, exhibits more
stable performance across domains. These findings highlight
the vulnerability of compact single-modal models to domain
mismatch and underscore the importance of cross-domain
robustness in real-world deployments.
Although domain-shifted models show noticeable perfor-
mance degradation compared to domain-matched training,
particularly in radar-only settings, these results underscore the
practical challenge of generalizing to unseen environments.
In real-world deployments, sensing-aided beamformers are
unlikely to encounter the same environmental conditions as
those used during training, making robustness to domain
shift a critical requirement. Our findings reveal that compact
radar-only student models are particularly sensitive to such
shifts, likely due to their limited input diversity and lower
representational capacity. This highlights the need for more
effective domain generalization strategies, such as domain-
invariant feature learning, data augmentation across diverse
scenarios, or lightweight fine-tuning mechanisms. In future
work, we aim to explore these approaches in depth and
incorporate domain-shift robustness as a core evaluation cri-
terion, with the goal of enabling resource-constrained student
models to maintain reliable performance across heterogeneous
deployment environments.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have developed a novel CRKD framework
for efficient mmWave beam prediction, in which a multimodal
teacher model (LiDAR, radar, GPS, and RGB) transfers rela-
tional knowledge to a radar-only student. To achieve realistic
evaluations, we have integrated CARLA-based sensor data
generation with MATLAB-based mmWave channel modeling,
creating a comprehensive simulation environment. Experimen-
tal results in 2-Lane and 3-Lane road scenarios confirmed that
a compact student model with radar can only approach the
performance of a transformer-based teacher rich in sensors.
This indicates that real-world applications remain viable even
with fewer sensor modalities and a smaller network structure.
In future work, we plan to incorporate domain adaptation
techniques into the CRKD process to further enhance the
generalization of the student model under changing conditions.
We will also integrate additional sensors and more complex
mobility patterns into our simulation framework, with the aim
of maintaining high beam prediction accuracy in resource-
constrained deployment scenarios and across diverse real-
world environments.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
13
REFERENCES
[1] H. Tataria, M. Shafi, A. F. Molisch, M. Dohler, H. Sj¨oland, and
F. Tufvesson, “6g wireless systems: Vision, requirements, challenges,
insights, and opportunities,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 109, no. 7,
pp. 1166–1199, 2021.
[2] D. d. S. Brilhante, J. C. Manjarres, R. Moreira, L. de Oliveira Veiga,
J. F. de Rezende, F. M¨uller, A. Klautau, L. Leonel Mendes, and F. A.
P. de Figueiredo, “A literature survey on ai-aided beamforming and beam
management for 5g and 6g systems,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 9, p. 4359,
2023.
[3] Y.-N. R. Li, B. Gao, X. Zhang, and K. Huang, “Beam management
in millimeter-wave communications for 5g and beyond,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 13 282–13 293, 2020.
[4] D. Wen, Y. Zhou, X. Li, Y. Shi, K. Huang, and K. B. Letaief, “A
survey on integrated sensing, communication, and computation,” IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 2024.
[5] B. Salehi, G. Reus-Muns, D. Roy, Z. Wang, T. Jian, J. Dy, S. Ioannidis,
and K. Chowdhury, “Deep learning on multimodal sensor data at the
wireless edge for vehicular network,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.04712,
2022.
[6] Z. Xiao, L. Zhu, Y. Liu, P. Yi, R. Zhang, X.-G. Xia, and R. Schober, “A
survey on millimeter-wave beamforming enabled uav communications
and networking,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 24,
no. 1, pp. 557–610, 2021.
[7] M. Q. Khan, A. Gaber, P. Schulz, and G. Fettweis, “Machine learning
for millimeter wave and terahertz beam management: A survey and open
challenges,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 11 880–11 902, 2023.
[8] S. Jiang, G. Charan, and A. Alkhateeb, “Lidar aided future beam
prediction in real-world millimeter wave v2i communications,” IEEE
Wireless Communications Letters, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 212–216, 2022.
[9] S. Wu, M. Alrabeiah, C. Chakrabarti, and A. Alkhateeb, “Blockage
prediction using wireless signatures: Deep learning enables real-world
demonstration,” IEEE Open Journal of the Communications Society,
vol. 3, pp. 776–796, 2022.
[10] X. Cheng, H. Zhang, J. Zhang, S. Gao, S. Li, Z. Huang, L. Bai, Z. Yang,
X. Zheng, and L. Yang, “Intelligent multi-modal sensing-communication
integration: Synesthesia of machines,” IEEE Communications Surveys &
Tutorials, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 258–301, 2023.
[11] A.
Alkhateeb,
G.
Charan,
T.
Osman,
A.
Hredzak,
J.
Morais,
U. Demirhan, and N. Srinivas, “Deepsense 6g: A large-scale real-world
multi-modal sensing and communication dataset,” IEEE Communica-
tions Magazine, vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 122–128, 2023.
[12] S. Blandino, “Dataset of channels and received ieee 802.11ay signals for
sensing applications in the 60ghz band,” National Institute of Standards
and Technology, 2021.
[13] H. Liu, A. Alali, M. Ibrahim, B. B. Cao, N. Meegan, H. Li, M. Gruteser,
S. Jain, K. Dana, A. Ashok et al., “Vi-fi: Associating moving subjects
across vision and wireless sensors,” in 2022 21st ACM/IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Information Processing in Sensor Networks
(IPSN).
IEEE, 2022, pp. 208–219.
[14] A. Alkhateeb, “DeepMIMO: A generic deep learning dataset for mil-
limeter wave and massive MIMO applications,” in Proc. of Information
Theory and Applications Workshop (ITA), San Diego, CA, Feb 2019,
pp. 1–8.
[15] A. Klautau, P. Batista, N. Gonz´alez-Prelcic, Y. Wang, and R. W. Heath,
“5G MIMO data for machine learning: Application to beam-selection
using deep learning,” in 2018 Information Theory and Applications
Workshop (ITA).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–9.
[16] M. Alrabeiah, A. Hredzak, Z. Liu, and A. Alkhateeb, “ViWi: A deep
learning dataset framework for vision-aided wireless communications,”
in submitted to IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference, Nov. 2019.
[17] Y. Li, D. Ma, Z. An, Z. Wang, Y. Zhong, S. Chen, and C. Feng, “V2x-
sim: Multi-agent collaborative perception dataset and benchmark for
autonomous driving,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 7,
no. 4, pp. 10 914–10 921, 2022.
[18] D. Steinmetzer, D. Wegemer, M. Schulz, J. Widmer, and M. Hollick,
“Compressive millimeter-wave sector selection in off-the-shelf ieee
802.11 ad devices,” in Proceedings of the 13th International Conference
on emerging Networking EXperiments and Technologies, 2017, pp. 414–
425.
[19] S. Kutty and D. Sen, “Beamforming for millimeter wave communica-
tions: An inclusive survey,” IEEE communications surveys & tutorials,
vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 949–973, 2015.
[20] Y. Heng, J. G. Andrews, J. Mo, V. Va, A. Ali, B. L. Ng, and J. C. Zhang,
“Six key challenges for beam management in 5.5 g and 6g systems,”
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 74–79, 2021.
[21] H. Que, J. Yang, C.-K. Wen, S. Xia, X. Li, and S. Jin, “Joint beam
management and slam for mmwave communication systems,” IEEE
Transactions on Communications, vol. 71, no. 10, pp. 6162–6179, 2023.
[22] J. Zhang, Y. Huang, Q. Shi, J. Wang, and L. Yang, “Codebook design
for beam alignment in millimeter wave communication systems,” IEEE
Transactions on Communications, vol. 65, no. 11, pp. 4980–4995, 2017.
[23] M. Alrabeiah, Y. Zhang, and A. Alkhateeb, “Neural networks based
beam codebooks: Learning mmwave massive mimo beams that adapt
to deployment and hardware,” IEEE Transactions on Communications,
vol. 70, no. 6, pp. 3818–3833, 2022.
[24] Y. Bian, J. Yang, S. Xia, and S. Jin, “3-d lidar and gps aided beam
tracking in millimeter wave vehicular communications,” IEEE Wireless
Communications Letters, 2024.
[25] J. Nie, Q. Zhou, J. Mu, and X. Jing, “Vision and radar multimodal aided
beam prediction: Facilitating metaverse development,” in Proceedings
of the 2nd Workshop on Integrated Sensing and Communications for
Metaverse, 2023, pp. 13–18.
[26] Y. Cui, J. Nie, X. Cao, T. Yu, J. Zou, J. Mu, and X. Jing, “Sensing-
assisted high reliable communication: A transformer-based beamforming
approach,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, 2024.
[27] S. Tariq, B. E. Arfeto, U. Khalid, S. Kim, T. Q. Duong, and H. Shin,
“Deep quantum-transformer networks for multi-modal beam prediction
in isac systems,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2024.
[28] Y. Tian, Q. Zhao, F. Boukhalfa, K. Wu, F. Bader et al., “Multimodal
transformers for wireless communications: A case study in beam pre-
diction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.11811, 2023.
[29] G. Charan, T. Osman, A. Hredzak, N. Thawdar, and A. Alkhateeb,
“Vision-position multi-modal beam prediction using real millimeter
wave datasets,” in 2022 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking
Conference (WCNC).
IEEE, 2022, pp. 2727–2731.
[30] Q. Zhu, Y. Wang, W. Li, H. Huang, and G. Gui, “Advancing multi-modal
beam prediction with cross-modal feature enhancement and dynamic
fusion mechanism,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, 2025.
[31] L. Cazzella, F. Linsalata, M. Magarini, M. Matteucci, and U. Spagnolini,
“A multi-modal simulation framework to enable digital twin-based
v2x communications in dynamic environments,” in 2024 IEEE 100th
Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC2024-Fall).
IEEE, 2024, pp.
1–6.
[32] X. Cheng, Z. Huang, L. Bai, H. Zhang, M. Sun, B. Liu, S. Li,
J. Zhang, and M. Lee, “M 3 sc: A generic dataset for mixed multi-
modal (mmm) sensing and communication integration,” China Commu-
nications, vol. 20, no. 11, pp. 13–29, 2023.
[33] G. Gharsallah and G. Kaddoum, “Mvx-vit: Multimodal collaborative
perception for 6g v2x network management decisions using vision
transformer,” IEEE Open Journal of the Communications Society, 2024.
[34] G. Hinton, “Distilling the knowledge in a neural network,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1503.02531, 2015.
[35] J. Gou, B. Yu, S. J. Maybank, and D. Tao, “Knowledge distillation: A
survey,” International Journal of Computer Vision, vol. 129, no. 6, pp.
1789–1819, 2021.
[36] C. Yang, X. Yu, Z. An, and Y. Xu, “Categories of response-based,
feature-based, and relation-based knowledge distillation,” in Advance-
ments in Knowledge Distillation: Towards New Horizons of Intelligent
Systems.
Springer, 2023, pp. 1–32.
[37] L. Zhao, J. Song, and K. A. Skinner, “Crkd: Enhanced camera-radar
object detection with cross-modality knowledge distillation,” in Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2024, pp. 15 470–15 480.
[38] F. Huo, W. Xu, J. Guo, H. Wang, and S. Guo, “C2kd: Bridging the
modality gap for cross-modal knowledge distillation,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2024, pp. 16 006–16 015.
[39] J. Ni, R. Sarbajna, Y. Liu, A. H. Ngu, and Y. Yan, “Cross-modal knowl-
edge distillation for vision-to-sensor action recognition,” in ICASSP
2022-2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing (ICASSP).
IEEE, 2022, pp. 4448–4452.
[40] A. Dosovitskiy, G. Ros, F. Codevilla, A. Lopez, and V. Koltun,
“CARLA: An open urban driving simulator,” in Proceedings of the 1st
Annual Conference on Robot Learning, 2017, pp. 1–16.
[41] T. M. Inc., “Matlab version: 9.13.0 (r2022b),” Natick, Massachusetts,
United States, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.mathworks.com
[42] S. Kullback and R. A. Leibler, “On information and sufficiency,” The
annals of mathematical statistics, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 79–86, 1951.
[43] S. Wang, R. She, Q. Kang, X. Jian, K. Zhao, Y. Song, and W. P. Tay,
“Distilvpr: Cross-modal knowledge distillation for visual place recogni-
tion,” in Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence,
vol. 38, no. 9, 2024, pp. 10 377–10 385.
