This paper has been published in open access on Elsevier Computer Networks. This is the author’s accepted version
of the article. The final version published by Elsevier is Andrea Lacava, Leonardo Bonati, Niloofar Mohamadi, Ra-
jeev Gangula, Florian Kaltenberger, Pedram Johari, Salvatore D’Oro, Francesca Cuomo, Michele Polese, Tommaso
Melodia, “dApps: Enabling real-time AI-based Open RAN control”, Computer Networks, Volume 269, 2025, 111342,
ISSN 1389-1286, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2025.111342.
CC BY-NC 4.0.
dApps: Enabling Real-Time AI-Based Open RAN Control
Andrea Lacavaa,b,∗, Leonardo Bonatia, Niloofar Mohamadia, Rajeev Gangulaa, Florian
Kaltenbergera,c, Pedram Joharia, Salvatore D’Oroa, Francesca Cuomob, Michele Polesea,
Tommaso Melodiaa
aInstitute for the Wireless Internet of Things, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA
bSapienza University of Rome, 00184 Rome, Italy
cEURECOM, Sophia-Antipolis, France
Abstract
Open Radio Access Networks (RANs) leverage disaggregated and programmable RAN functions and
open interfaces to enable closed-loop, data-driven radio resource management. This is performed
through custom intelligent applications on the RAN Intelligent Controllers (RICs), optimizing RAN
policy scheduling, network slicing, user session management, and medium access control, among
others. In this context, we have proposed dApps as a key extension of the O-RAN architecture
into the real-time and user-plane domains. Deployed directly on RAN nodes, dApps access data
otherwise unavailable to RICs due to privacy or timing constraints, enabling the execution of
control actions within shorter time intervals. In this paper, we propose for the first time a reference
architecture for dApps, defining their life cycle from deployment by the Service Management and
Orchestration (SMO) to real-time control loop interactions with the RAN nodes where they are
hosted. We introduce a new dApp interface, E3, along with an Application Protocol (AP) that
supports structured message exchanges and extensible communication for various service models.
By bridging E3 with the existing O-RAN E2 interface, we enable dApps, xApps, and rApps to
coexist and coordinate. These applications can then collaborate on complex use cases and employ
hierarchical control to resolve shared resource conflicts.
Finally, we present and open-source a
dApp framework based on OpenAirInterface (OAI). We benchmark its performance in two real-time
control use cases, i.e., spectrum sharing and positioning in a 5th generation (5G) Next Generation
Node Base (gNB) scenario.
Our experimental results show that standardized real-time control
loops via dApps are feasible, achieving average control latency below 450 microseconds and allowing
optimal use of shared spectral resources.
Keywords:
Open RAN, dApps, Real-Time Control Loops, Radio Resource Management (RRM),
Spectrum Sharing, Positioning, Integrated Sensing and Communication (ISAC)
∗Corresponding author
Email addresses: a.lacava@northeastern.edu (Andrea Lacava), l.bonati@northeastern.edu (Leonardo
Bonati), n.mohamadi@northeastern.edu (Niloofar Mohamadi), r.gangula@northeastern.edu (Rajeev Gangula),
f.kaltenberger@northeastern.edu (Florian Kaltenberger), p.johari@northeastern.edu (Pedram Johari),
s.doro@northeastern.edu (Salvatore D’Oro), francesca.cuomo@uniroma1.it (Francesca Cuomo),
m.polese@northeastern.edu (Michele Polese), t.melodia@northeastern.edu (Tommaso Melodia)
arXiv:2501.16502v2  [cs.NI]  4 Nov 2025
1. Introduction
The Open Radio Access Network (RAN) architecture promotes open, multi-vendor, software-
driven, and programmable cellular networks.
Formalized in the O-RAN ALLIANCE technical
specifications, this novel network architecture introduces the RAN Intelligent Controller (RIC), a
software component that leverages open interfaces to gather RAN data, run inference, and enact
control, adapting the network to current demands, conditions, and requirements. O-RAN specifi-
cations discuss two versions of the RIC. The Near-RT RIC oversees the RAN operations via xApps
that operate in the 10 ms to 1 s timescale, while the Non-RT RIC hosts rApps that operate at
timescales higher than 1 s.
xApps and rApps enable a variety of use cases where the RAN can be dynamically configured
to optimally handle and adapt to varying network conditions. Wireless systems are characterized
by rapidly changing channel conditions, dynamic traffic patterns, user mobility, and periodic or
seasonal patterns in network utilization, to name a few. Examples of RIC-enabled control include
network slicing [1, 2], traffic steering [3, 4], beamforming and mobility management [5], advanced
sleep modes [6], anomaly detection [7], and spectrum and radio resource allocation [8].
The current O-RAN architecture, though, comes with two key limitations: (i) xApps and rApps
are primarily designed to handle control-plane data and operations, thus not considering user-plane
data, such as I/Q samples and packets for inference and optimization; and (ii) does not enable
control loops at timescales below the 10 ms one enabled by xApps. Indeed, as we will discuss in
later sections of this paper, being unable to process user-plane data and perform inference and
control below the 10 ms timescale limits the application of O-RAN technologies at the lower levels
of the protocol stack, as well as the introduction of novel use cases and applications (e.g., Radio
Frequency (RF) fingerprinting [9], one-shot beam steering, anomaly and attack detection [10],
spectrum sensing and incumbent detection [11], joint sensing and communications [12, 13], to name
a few) which will be at the center of 6G [14].
To overcome these limitations, we proposed the concept of dApps [15]. Similarly to xApps and
rApps, dApps are software components that can execute as microservices, designed to be co-located
with Central Units (CUs) and Distributed Units (DUs), where user-plane data is readily available.
Currently, the adoption of dApps is under investigation by the O-RAN next Generation Research
Group (nGRG) as a way to bring below 10 ms Artificial Intelligence (AI)/Machine Learning (ML)
routines to the RAN. The advantages introduced by dApps are manifold: (i) they can execute
real-time operations at the DU/CU directly to achieve real-time control and monitoring of the
RAN without the need to involve the RICs; (ii) they have a lightweight lifecycle management, and
can be instantiated and deleted seamlessly to provide functionalities as-a-service based on operator
requirements; and (iii) they have access to user-plane data that cannot leave the DU/CU due to
privacy concerns (e.g., user-related data) or impracticality (e.g., I/Q streams require high bandwidth
in the order of Gbps, which would generate congestion over the other O-RAN interfaces [15]).
How to bring AI/ML to O-RAN and push inference toward the real-time domain has received
increasing interest in the last few years. Apart from dApps, the literature offers different proposals
that include the concepts of real-time RIC and µApps [16], zApps [17], tApps [18], to name a
few. In this direction, we recently edited an O-RAN nGRG research report [19], with input and
collaborations across academia and industry aimed at exploring use cases and applications that
would benefit from dApps. These include real-time scheduler reconfiguration, spectrum sensing,
compute resource scaling for energy savings, channel equalization, beam management and many
others.
Despite the well-defined use cases, an architecture for implementing dApps in cellular
networks is still lacking. In particular, a comprehensive description of the procedures, interfaces,
2
modules, and their interactions with existing O-RAN components—such as xApps, rApps, RICs,
DUs, CUs, and open interfaces (e.g., O1, O2, and E2)—is still missing.
Novelty and Contributions. In this paper, we fill this gap and propose a reference architecture
for dApps with the goal of fostering design and prototyping of dApp-based use cases and applications
for O-RAN systems. Specifically, we propose an architecture that can be seamlessly integrated with
the existing O-RAN architecture with minimal procedural changes. This minimizes the impact that
dApps have on O-RAN standardization, while still making their use feasible and practical. We also
propose a Lifecycle Management (LCM) for the deployment and management of dApps in the O-
RAN architecture. Once deployed, we show that dApps can leverage already existing interfaces and
procedures to exchange data with the Near-RT RIC over the E2 interface and perform monitoring
and control tasks using a custom E2Service Model (SM) model, i.e., E2SM-DAPP. We introduce a
novel E3 interface to allow dApps to interact in real time with DUs and CU, for data and control
exchange.
We develop and release as open-source1 a framework for dApps integrated with the popular
OpenAirInterface (OAI) 5G RAN framework. We evaluate the framework on Colosseum [20] and
Arena [21] platforms, conducting an extensive performance analysis to benchmark dApp execution
and feasibility.
Our results demonstrate that dApps operate within real-time control intervals,
efficiently processing both vector data (e.g., I/Q arrays extracted from the RAN) and scalar values
in loops taking less than 450 microseconds—well below the 10 ms threshold required for real-time
operations.
Additionally, we implement two distinct dApp use cases using the proposed framework for
Integrated Sensing and Communication (ISAC): positioning and spectrum sharing. The results
reveal that the positioning dApp is able to compute the distance between the User Equipment (UE)
and the Next Generation Node Base (gNB) using the UE Uplink (UL) Channel Impulse Response
(CIR) collected by the gNB in real-time, and with the advantage of plug-and-play, customizable
processing routines. Finally, the spectrum-sharing dApp effectively detects incumbents in the 5th
generation (5G) gNB RF context, enabling more efficient spectrum utilization through real-time
analysis.
If compared to [15], this paper provides a significantly more detailed and practical architecture
for dApps integrated with O-RAN systems. Specifically, we provide details on procedures, messages,
protocols, and data structures necessary for dApp operation. Additionally, we provide a prototype
implementation of dApps in OAI, demonstrating real-time interactions between dApps and the
RAN protocol stack. Ultimately, we provide an extensive performance evaluation focusing on real-
time feasibility and practical benefits. Our results show that dApps can perform inference within
10 ms, classify incumbents within 450 µs, and enable real-time UE positioning.
We believe that the combination of architectural framework, open-source reference library for
dApps, and the thorough performance evaluation will inspire further research and development
efforts in the real-time control domain.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the current state of the
art for the real-time control loops in O-RAN, highlighting the differences between our work and the
real-time RICs proposed in the literature. Section 3 describes the role of the dApps within the O-
RAN architecture and the use cases that can benefit from their implementation. Section 4 presents
1The framework is available at https://github.com/wineslab/dApp-framework. A tutorial on how to use the
framework is available at https://openrangym.com/tutorials/dapps-oai.
3
the integration of the dApps in the O-RAN architecture, introducing the E3 logic interface and
describing the message exchange between the dApps and the other O-RAN components. Section 5
describes the lifecycle of the dApps, from their onboarding through the Service Management and
Orchestration (SMO) to their deployment and in the RAN unit. In Section 6, we provide a reference
implementation of the architecture proposed based on OAI and a custom Python framework to
measure the real-time control loop communication.
We also discuss benchmarking results that
profile the performance of the control loop, demonstrating that our real-time control loop can
execute in less than 450 µs. In Section 7, we use our framework to develop two dApp-powered use
cases: Spectrum Sharing and Sensing and Positioning. We evaluate their performance and impact
on the RAN, and show how dApps can detect incumbents in a 5G network and enable spectrum
sharing with them. Section 8 concludes the paper and envisions future developments for dApps.
Further clarifications on the dApp deployment process are discussed in Appendix A.
2. Related Work and Comparison with Real-time RIC
The need for the introduction of real-time control loops in O-RAN has been advocated in recent
works to control lower-layer functionalities of the gNB protocol stack [22, 23]. In our previous
work [15], we introduced the concept of dApps to process data locally available at the gNB, and
the need for sub-10 ms control loops. However, our prior work primarily focused on advocating
the benefits of such tighter control loops for generic use cases. In this work, instead, we propose
a complete reference architecture and design for dApps, including interfaces for interoperability of
dApps with the rest of the O-RAN components. Then, we showcase the capabilities and potential
of dApps for use cases of interest to Open RAN networks.
The need for real-time control loops and inference in O-RAN has also been highlighted by the
broader community. For example, the concept of Real-time RICs and its applications have been
proposed in [17, 18, 16]. Specifically, [17] proposes to embed CUs and DUs inside the real-time
RIC, as well as to further disaggregate their functionalities, where each one (e.g., Medium Access
Control (MAC) scheduler, channel estimators, and beam shapers) is carried out by a dedicated
application, namely zApp. [18] proposes TinyRIC, which runs close to the CU/DU, and so-called
tApps hosted therein. The latter aid the CU/DU by performing functionalities spanning from the
management of non-3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) interfaces (e.g., O1 and E2), to
energy management, to providing primitives for data collection. Similarly, [16] proposed EdgeRIC
and its applications, µApps, that interface with the RAN to make decisions at Transmission Time
Interval (TTI) level. Although these approaches propose a viable way to introduce real-time control
in the RAN, they do so by replicating functionalities typical of non- and Near-RT RICs, e.g., intelli-
gence orchestration, in a new RT RIC platform, which inherently increases the network complexity,
as well as resource utilization and energy consumption. Our approach, instead, leverages existing
RIC and well-established routines to deploy and operate applications on the RAN elements, while
avoiding the additional complexity and resource utilization that the additional RT controllers would
require. Indeed, the main difference between the above-mentioned solutions and dApps lies in the
way intelligent applications are hosted and executed. A high-level architectural comparison of the
two approaches is shown in Fig. 1, which highlights the placement of intelligent applications in the
each of them. While the above-mentioned applications require a dedicated RT RIC entity, as well
as additional layers of network abstractions, dApps execute at the CU/DU directly. This minimizes
the impact on the E2 nodes and takes advantage of interfaces and functionalities already defined
in the O-RAN specifications.
4
E2
F1-c
F1-u
O-CU-CP
O-CU-UP
O-RU
Open Fronthaul
RT-RIC
App
O-DU
RLC
MAC
High PHY
DU
Functions
App
App
Conflict 
mitigation
Subscription 
MGMT
Security
(a) RT-RIC deployment
F1-c
F1-u
O-CU-CP
O-CU-UP
O-RU
Open Fronthaul
RLC
MAC
High PHY
DU
Functions
E2
dApp
dApp
dApp
O-DU
(b) dApp deployment
Figure 1: Comparison between RT RIC and dApp architectures. From [19].
Finally, [24] proposes Janus, a monitoring and control framework that can load and execute
custom real-time “codelets” on the CU and DU. Even though this work—possibly the most similar
to ours—extends O-RAN to real-time control, Janus’s codelets require direct access to the CU/DU
protocol stack rather than interfacing with it, as dApps instead do. In some cases, this can be a
limitation as vendors might need to host third-party codelets rather than exposing parameters via
interfaces to regulate access to CU/DU functionalities. Moreover, this approach also requires the
definition and deployment of a dedicated controller on the RIC, instead of relying on standard-
ized components for the management of real-time RAN functions, as we instead do in our dApp
architecture.
Table 1 summarizes the key differences between dApps and other real-time control solutions
and the advantages of our proposal.
5
Feature
dApps (this work)
RT
RIC-based
Solu-
tions
(zApps
[17],
tApps
[18],
µApps [16])
Janus [24]
Connectivity to RAN
stack
Disaggregated
Disaggregated
Integrated
Timescale
< 1 ms
from
<
1 ms
(µApp,
tApp) to < 10 ms (zApp)
< 1 ms
Deployment Location
Directly on CU/DU
Require
dedicated
RT
RIC platform
Directly modifies CU/DU
protocol stack
Additional
Network
Complexity
Minimal, leverages exist-
ing RIC components
High, add new RIC layers
High,
modifies
CU/DU
stack
Resource Utilization
Optimized, avoids addi-
tional overhead
Increased
due
to
extra
control layers
High, requires additional
controllers
Integration
with
O-
RAN
Use
standardized
inter-
faces and components
Require
additional
net-
work abstractions
Limited, modifies proto-
col stack instead of inter-
facing with it
Scalability
High,
built on existing
RAN elements
Limited, require new in-
frastructure
Limited,
protocol stack
modifications
reduce
compatibility
Modularity
High, they interface with
CU/DU without modify-
ing stack
Medium,
dependent
on
RT RIC architecture
Low, tightly coupled with
CU/DU stack
Flexibility
Adapt
to
different
CU/DU implementations
Constrained by RT RIC
architecture
Low, as it relies on direct
modifications to protocol
stack
Use of Standard O-
RAN APIs
Yes, integrates with O-
RAN
standard
compo-
nents
Partially, introduce cus-
tom abstractions
No, modifies stack imple-
mentation directly
Table 1: Comparison of dApps with RT RIC-based solutions and Janus.
3. The Role of dApps in the Hierarchical O-RAN Control Architecture
Achieving programmability of the cellular protocol stack via closed-loop control is a fundamen-
tal innovation introduced by the O-RAN architecture and, more in general, by the Open RAN
vision [22]. With closed-loop control, data-driven logic units executed in xApp and rApps access
RAN telemetry and process it to identify RAN configurations that satisfy specific intents and ob-
jectives of the operator. The configuration is then applied to the RAN nodes either in form of
control (e.g., update a certain RAN parameter) or as a policy, allowing the system to reach the
desired state.
Figure 2 reports a simplified view of the O-RAN logical architecture and control loops. This
includes the RAN, with the Open CUs-Control Plane (CP) and User Plane (UP), the DU, and the
Radio Unit (RU).2 The F1 interface connects CU and DU, while the fronthaul interface bridges the
DU and the RU. The E1 interface is in between the CU-CP and UP network functions. The O-
RAN architecture leverages the Non-RT RIC and the SMO framework for orchestration and policy
definition, through the O1 interface to all RAN nodes and the A1 interface to the Near-RT RICs.
2For the purposes of this paper, we consistently refer to the Open RAN units while omitting the prefix “O-”.
6
Control and learning objective
Policies, models, slicing
User Session Management
e.g., load balancing, handover
Medium Access Management
e.g., scheduling policy, RAN slicing
Radio Management
e.g., scheduling, beamforming
Device DL/UL Management
e.g., modulation
Input data
Timescale
Infrastructure KPMs
Non-real-time
> 1 s
CU KPMs
e.g., number of 
sessions, PDCP traffic
Near-real-time
10-1000 ms
MAC KPMs
e.g., PRB utilization,
buffering
Real-time
< 10 ms
MAC/PHY KPMs
e.g., PRB utilization, 
channel estimation
I/Q samples
Real-time
< 1 ms
Near-real-time
10-1000 ms
Challenges and limitations
•
No real-time 
interactions with the 
RAN protocol stack 
(limits control use 
cases)
•
No access to the user 
plane of the RAN 
(security, privacy, data 
rates)
Architecture
Supported by O-RAN
dApp Extension
Non-real-time RIC and SMO
A1
O-RU
gNB
E2
O1
O-DU
O-CU-CP
Near-real-time RIC
E1
rApps
xApps
F1
F1
O-FH
O-CU-UP
dApps
dApps
dApps
•
dApp architecture and 
integration with stack 
(this paper)
•
Efficient and fast 
AI/ML models for 
closed-loop inference
Figure 2: O-RAN control loops, limitations, and extensions to the real-time and user-plane domains.
Adapted
from [22].
The latter performs radio resource management with direct control of the RAN nodes through the
E2 interface. These elements are deployed over a set of physical and virtualized resources on a
heterogeneous infrastructure (i.e., the O-Cloud). The O2 interface from the SMO interacts with
the O-Cloud to configure the compute layer.
The current O-RAN architecture features two control loops, at the non-real-time and the near-
real-time scales.
The first, exercised by the Non-RT RIC, identifies policies that apply to the
network considering Key Performance Measurements (KPMs) reported on a scale of thousands of
end devices. It operates at a scale of 1 s or more. The second loop runs between 10 ms and 1 s,
and is exercised by the Near-RT RIC. It can perform control or deploy policies, potentially based
on the ones defined by non-real-time loops. Due to the tighter requirements on the completion
of the control loop, the Near-RT RIC usually targets tens of base stations with hundreds of end
devices [25].
These loops, however, share some limitations, as discussed in the right portion of Fig. 2, such
as the lack of control loops faster than 10 ms, and the lack of interaction and programmability on
the user-plane data. Real-time interactions open up many fine-grained and new customizable and
programmable inference and control loop capabilities, including beam management, scheduling pro-
file selection, packet tagging, dynamic spectrum access, and Quality of Service (QoS) enforcement,
among others. Further, access to user-plane data would enable direct interaction with waveforms
and Packet Data Units (PDUs) at different layer of the stack, as well as inference and control
based on the rich information that these elements carry. There is a significant body of research
demonstrating the benefit of inference and classification based on raw I/Q samples for anomaly de-
tection, spectrum sensing, fingerprinting, and beam management, among others [26, 11, 27, 9, 28].
The same applies to user-plane units at higher layers, i.e., transport blocks, Radio Link Control
(RLC) and Packet Data Convergence Protocol (PDCP) packets, e.g., for traffic classification and
slice identification [29, 1].
However, O-RAN xApp/rApp-based control loops are not suitable for real-time control. For
example, transferring I/Q samples or, in general, user data out of the RAN, is generally unfeasible
due to security, privacy, and timing/bandwidth constraints, as also mentioned in Sec 1. We discussed
this in [15, 19], estimating that transferring I/Q samples through a rate-limited E2 interface would
take seconds, which is incompatible with real-time interactions, and can limit the capabilities of
7
the E2SM for the Lower Layer Control (LLC) [30]. Bringing programmability and observability to
RAN nodes is, thus, paramount to address both limitations. The bottom part of Fig. 2 illustrates
the role that dApps can play in future iterations of the O-RAN architecture. dApps are lightweight
and plug-and-play services that provide secure and real-time access to the stack without introducing
the overhead that an additional real-time RIC would bring to network-oriented RAN nodes.
Use Cases for dApps and Real-time Control Loops. In [19], recently published as contributed re-
search report by the O-RAN ALLIANCE, we reviewed how dApps can complete the hierarchical
structure of control loops within the O-RAN architecture. The use cases can be classified into four
main groups, described next.
• Direct Processing of Waveforms and PDUs. Access to I/Q samples can be used for
physical layer security, e.g., through anomaly detection to detect spoofing of base stations or
legitimate users [10], and with RF fingerprinting for secure authentication. Similarly, infor-
mation carried by I/Q samples on scheduled or unscheduled symbols can be used to detect
spectrum holes or incumbents. This enables spectrum sharing but also remote interference
detection, including from other base stations in the operator network. In both cases, infor-
mation processed at the dApp level can be shared with the stack or xApps to coordinate
responses across multiple RAN nodes, paving the way for the RAN to function as an ISAC
system.
• Real-Time Scheduling and Beam Management.
This includes real-time scheduling
reconfiguration to embed ad hoc policies and Service Level Agreements (SLAs) for specific
traffic patterns and profiles (e.g., new slices), scheduling acceleration for efficient massive
Multiple Input, Multiple Output (MIMO) and multi-cell coordination [31], and real-time
sharing coordination with arbitration across different entities [32]. Similarly, beam manage-
ment procedures can be enhanced and aided by direct access and manipulation of reference
and synchronization signals in the DU [33]. In this context, dApps can extract real-time mea-
surements, perform data-driven inference at near-real-time periodicity, and send the resulting
data to an xApp, which uses it to control beamforming via the existing E2SM LLC [30].
• RAN Nodes and Fronthaul Configuration. dApps can be used to dynamically reconfig-
ure and tune the RAN nodes underlying compute and the fronthaul interface between the DU
and RU. For example, dApps can bridge real-time RAN telemetry from the stack with the
compute node configuration to dynamically modify CPU pinning or CPU energy states for
energy-efficiency optimization. Similarly, the real-time telemetry can dynamically affect how
the fronthaul interface is configured, e.g., adapting the compression level to save resources
when users have good Signal-to-Noise-Ratio (SNR) and providing uncompressed streaming
for users at the edge of the cell.
• Augmented Sensing and Channel Estimation.
dApps can enable dynamic Channel
State Information (CSI) compression in coordination with UEs [34], as well as custom AI/ML
models for channel estimation that can be tailored to specific user conditions and requirements.
dApps can also be used to process reference and synchronization signals for use cases not
traditionally considered within RAN nodes, e.g., sensing and positioning [35].
8
4. dApp Service-based Architecture and Integration with RAN Nodes
Based on the use cases and related requirements discussed in Sec. 3, in the following paragraphs
we discuss how the O-RAN architecture can be extended to support dApps as custom, pluggable
RAN microservices.
We focus on three key elements: (i) the integration of dApps with RAN
nodes, extended via a service-based E3 interface; (ii) the proposed E3 procedures that enable
seamless message exchange between the RAN and the dApps; and (iii) the interactions between
dApps and xApps, facilitated through our E3 interface and the O-RAN E2 interface to the Near-
RT RIC. Moreover, the E3 interface requires two main components, the E3 API and E3 Agent.
The E3 Application Programming Interface (API) is the software implementation of the E3 logical
interface, providing the necessary functions for interaction. Meanwhile, the E3 Agent is a entity that
implements the E3 interface using the E3 API to facilitate and manage communication. Further
discussion on the dApps lifecycle and the role of the O1 interface is provided in Sec. 5. Finally,
Sec. 6 describes a prototype of E3 Agent based on this architecture and the open-source OAI stack
as a reference.
Near-RT RIC
Compose / fuse 
information from dApps
xApp
Change RAN configuration
xApp Intelligent Logic
Create control action 
for the RAN node
E2
E2SM
DAPP
dApp
Telemetry/KPMs/
PDUs/IQ samples
RAN Indication 
Messages 
Expose 
data/telemetry
RAN Function (DU, CU-UP, CU-CP)
Change RAN 
configuration
dApp Report 
Messages
E3
E3
E3 Manager
E3 Setup 
Request /
Response
E3 Agent
Subscription Manager
E2 Termination 
E3 Subscription 
Request / 
Response
E3
Control dApp 
behavior
Expose telemetry/KPMs/PDUs/IQs 
without blocking RAN Node
Change RAN parameters
Change RAN configuration
E3
dApps
Control 
Messages 
E2 Bridge
Expose dApp 
data
xApp Control 
Messages
E3
E3 API layer
dApp Intelligent 
Logic
RAN context
Pairing of dApps with RAN data
KPMs from dApp 1
KPMs from dApp …
KPMs from dApp N
Figure 3: O-RAN Near-RT RIC integration with dApps and a generic RAN node.
4.1. dApps Data, Telemetry, and Control Flows
In Fig. 3, dApps are shown as standalone pluggable microservices with a southbound E3 interface
to the RAN node (either DU and CU) that is also bridged with the RAN E2 termination for
cooperation with the xApps. The southbound interface, which we design as a service-based API,
discussed below, can be used to expose a variety of data and telemetry from the RAN. Data can
be accessed through streams, by polling, and with different periodicity and granularity.
The DU RAN function can provide the dApp with access to a variety of information elements
in the data plane. I/Q samples can be accessed pre- or post-equalization, depending on the dApp
requirements, at different levels of granularity and periodicity. Such data can be collected from
9
various channels such as Physical Uplink Control Channel (PUCCH) or Physical Uplink Shared
Channel (PUSCH), and can include all subcarriers or specific subsets. The Buffer Status Reports
(BSRs), exchanged by MAC and RLC instances, provide real-time information about buffer condi-
tions and can be streamed at different intervals (e.g., per slot or subframe) or accessed on-demand.
Channel Quality Information (CQI) values are generated based on O-DU processing and can be
streamed immediately or polled on demand to support dynamic resource allocation. CSI can be
similarly streamed in real-time or accessed on-demand for adaptive modulation and coding deci-
sions. Finally, uplink Sounding Reference Signal (SRS), transmitted by the UE and processed by
the O-DU, can be made available either continuously or on request, providing insights for uplink
resource configuration.
The DU and CU-UP RAN functions can also expose transport blocks or PDUs at the MAC, RLC,
PDCP, and Service Data Adaptation Protocol (SDAP) layers according to configurable policies,
which may involve streaming a subset of packets at certain intervals or polling them on demand.
In the control plane, the dApps can access MAC Downlink Control Information (DCI) and Uplink
Control Information (UCI) in the DU. These indications can be streamed when scheduling decisions
are made, or retrieved on request to inform dApps of the current state of resource allocation.
Additional information is represented by compute telemetry, i.e., information on CPU, RAM, and
accelerator utilization that can be streamed at high frequency (e.g., hundreds of microseconds)
to monitor system performance, or polled on demand for less frequent assessments, and fronthaul
configuration, to be polled as needed to ensure that the network setup aligns with the requirements
of various dApps. The CU-CP can expose information on slice and bearers configuration, user
sessions, among others. Finally, KPMs from CU-CP, CU-UP, and DU, which are available over
E2 [36, 37, 38], can also be provided to the dApps.
In the opposite direction, dApps can provide the RAN functions with control actions, which
must be applied within a short interval (e.g., 0.5 ms) from the time a configuration is selected in the
dApp. The areas identified for control in the RAN nodes include elements to enable the use cases in
Sec. 3. The following examples illustrate the capabilities of dApps but are not exhaustive and can
be extended as needed. Within the DU, dApps can configure various aspects of the MAC scheduler,
including prioritization parameters, scheduling policies, and acceleration configurations. They can
also manage beamforming weights, codebooks, Synchronization Signal (SS) blocks and bursts, and
Channel State Information - Reference Signal (CSI-RS), as well as update mapping tables for Signal
to Interference plus Noise Ratio (SINR)-to-Modulation and Coding Scheme (MCS), apply Physical
Resource Block (PRB) masking or nulling, and control DCIs and UCIs. At the CU-UP and CU-CP
levels, dApps enable interactions with slice and cell configurations, allowing dynamic adjustments
to network slices and modifications to parameters such as transmit power and carrier frequency at
the cell level.
4.2. Service-Based dApps E3 API Endpoint
As depicted in Fig. 3, dApps are deployed as services coexisting with RAN nodes. An E3 API
endpoint (or E3 agent) bridges the RAN functions with the dApps. This agent provides a stan-
dardized API layer that supports functionalities such as dApp setup, configuration, data streaming
or polling, and control. By encapsulating RAN function capabilities, the E3 agent ensures dApp
independence from specific RAN implementations. In addition to interfacing with dApps, the E3
agent coordinates with the E2 termination within the RAN node, enabling seamless communication
between dApps and xApps. This facilitates the synchronization of control and adaptation processes
10
across the Near-RT RIC and dApps at varying timescales, ensuring efficient and dynamic network
management.
The architecture supports multiple dApps interacting with the same RAN function, provided
there are no conflicts. Conflict resolution is addressed holistically within the network as part of
the dApp lifecycle (Sec. 5). Moreover, the E3 agent, in collaboration with the O-Cloud and SMO,
monitors available compute resources on the O-Cloud physical node. It ensures that RAN workloads
are prioritized to meet SLAs while maintaining resource allocation for dApps.
To streamline dApp operations, the E3 agent consolidates access to RAN data, such as teleme-
try or data-plane units (e.g., I/Q samples). A centralized subscription manager within the agent
handles the dispatching of the management messages between the dApps and the RAN, i.e., the
initial pairing, the subscription request and response, and the eventual de-registration of the dApp.
This unified access mechanism eliminates redundant protocol stack calls and ensures efficient coor-
dination by allowing dApps to register callbacks for querying control and data functionalities. The
design simplifies interactions and maintains low latency, supporting seamless integration with RAN
operations without introducing overhead. With The E3 APIs enable dApps to extract necessary
RAN data and deliver computed control actions or inferences without disrupting RAN operations.
The API design ensures concurrent functionality across multiple dApps while maintaining oper-
ational integrity. Given the co-location of CUs/DUs and dApps on the same host, the E3 API
leverages Inter-Process Communication (IPC) mechanisms—such as shared memory, logical First
In First Out (FIFO) queues, function calls, or system-domain sockets—instead of network PDUs
or sockets. This approach is demonstrated in our prototype implementation (Sec. 6).
4.3. dApp and RAN interactions over E3
dApp
RAN function
E3 Setup Request
E3 API
E3 Setup Response
E3 Indication Message
E3 Subscription Request
E3 Control Message
E3 Subscription Response
Change RAN configuration
Subscription accepted
E3AP
E3SM
Figure 4: Message exchanges for a real time control loop between a dApp and the RAN node through the E3 interface.
An example of the interaction flow between a dApp and the RAN E3 agent is shown in Fig. 4.
Similar to the O-RAN approach for the E2 interface, we introduce a procedural API, called E3
Application Protocol (AP) (E3AP) consisting of two distinct logical steps to establish the association
between a single dApp and a RAN node with its data.
When deployed for the first time, the dApp triggers the E3 Setup procedure to perform the
authentication and pairing with the RAN node. Then, the E3 Subscription procedure enables the
11
dApp to query and subscribe to the data and control functionalities supported by the RAN function,
as defined through the E3 SMs APIs.
In order to enable the exposure of data or telemetry and the control of specific RAN functional-
ities, the E3SM are introduced as modular abstractions implemented through two dedicated APIs.
The first API is for the E3 Indication Message, to let the RAN function expose data to the dApp.
Access to this API is coordinated by the subscription manager in the E3 agent, as discussed above.
Similarly, the control generated by the dApp is delivered to the RAN function for processing in the
stack using the E3 Control Message API. In Sec. 7.1, we will provide a practical use case where
control messages from the dApp are used to avoid interfering signals via PRB nulling.
4.4. E2SM-DAPP: a service model for managing interactions between dApps and xApps
dApp
RAN function
E3 API
xApp
E2 interface
E2 Subscription Response 
with list of dApp IDs
E2 Subscription Request
E3 Report Message
E2 Indication Message
E2 Subscription Response
E2 Subscription Request with dApp ID
E2 Control Message
xApp Control Message
E2SM-DAPP
E3SM
Figure 5: Interactions between a dApp, the E2 RAN node, and an xApp through the E3 interface and the E2SM-
DAPP custom Service Model.
Apart from control actions that actively reconfigure RAN parameters based on input data,
dApps can also perform forecasting and prediction tasks. The outcome of these tasks is important
because it builds contextual awareness on RAN operations and conditions and, for this reason, it
might be useful to make it available to higher layers of the protocol stack, e.g., xApps executing at
the Near-RT RIC. This can be achieved by forwarding dApp inference outcomes to xApps in the
form of enrichment information transmitted over the RAN E2 interface (e.g., similarly to how the
A1 interface is used to forward useful information from the Non-RT RIC to the Near-RT RIC). From
the E2 perspective, the data exposed by dApps is managed through a novel, custom E2 SM [38],
which we call E2SM-DAPP, identified by a unique RAN function ID during the E2 Setup Request.
Fig. 5 summarizes the interactions between the dApps, the E2 RAN node, and the xApps. To
initiate these procedures, the xApps onboarded on the Near-RT RIC can send an E2 Subscription
Request to the RAN node, which responds via an E2 Subscription Response with a message that
includes the IDs of the dApps currently executing on the node. These discovery procedures are
executed continuously throughout the xApp lifecycle, enabling the discovery of new dApps as they
become available.
12
xApps that are willing to receive inference data (e.g., spectrum sensing outcomes, real-time
channel estimations, scheduling information) from the dApp can send an additional E2 Subscription
Request with the same dApp ID and a payload specifying the data they want to collect from the
dApp.
Once this pairing is established, the dApp periodically collects real-time data from the RAN
using the real-time control loop procedures described in Sec. 4.3, performs near-real-time inference
(e.g., spectrum classification), and transmits these inferences to the xApp using the E3 Report API,
which connects the dApp to xApps leveraging an E2 Indication Message via the RAN E2 interface.
It is also worth mentioning that xApps can configure how dApps take decisions and perform
inference by specifying high-level parameters and policies. These policies influence how the dApp
operates and can be used by xApps to influence decisions. For example, in the case of a dApp
performing scheduling operations, an xApp can specify which scheduling profile to use (e.g., round-
robin, proportional fairness) as well as defining priority weights for scheduling UEs and prioritizing
certain types of traffic. To enable this, the xApp sends an E2 Control Message to the RAN node,
which is then relayed over the E3 interface using the xApp Control Message to the target dApp.
5. dApp Lifecycle and Interaction with Near-RT RIC, Non-RT RIC, and SMO
In this section, we discuss how the LCM of dApps can be integrated into LCM practices defined
within the O-RAN architecture and processes. We follow and extend the specifications outlined
in [39, 40], which describe the standard procedures for the LCM of O-RAN applications, cloudifi-
cation, and orchestration use cases for deploying virtualized O-RAN solutions. The LCM process
follows a structured 7-stage model for the Software Development Lifecycle (SDLC) to ensure that
applications are developed, onboarded, and operated in a standardized way. It begins with Need
to identify requirements, followed by Ideation to brainstorm potential solutions, Analysis to assess
feasibility, Develop to build the application, Deliver to deploy the solution, Validate to test for
quality, and finally Operate to maintain the application in production.
This structured LCM approach is divided into three main phases: (i) Development, in which
applications are designed and built; (ii) Onboarding, in which applications are integrated into the
target environment; and (iii) Operations, in which applications are managed and maintained in
production [39]. Fig. 6 provides a high-level representation of dApp LCM, with particular focus on
the onboarding and operations phases. While the development process is common to all types of
applications (i.e., xApps, rApps, and dApps), Fig. 6 focuses specifically on unique aspects related
to onboarding and operation of dApps. While the SMO is responsible for deploying the dApp, once
deployed, the dApp can operate independently or be managed by other entities, such as an xApp,
through the E2SM-DAPP. In the following, we provide a detailed overview of how these phases can
be extended and adapted to dApp LCM.
5.1. Development
The development phase of the dApp LCM aligns with the Solution App Lifecycle and Solution
AppPackage Lifecycle outlined in the LCM model in [39].
The Solution App Lifecycle covers
the end-to-end process of designing, developing, deploying, and managing the dApp, ensuring its
smooth operation across its entire lifecycle. The Solution AppPackage Lifecycle focuses specifically
on the packaging, onboarding, and management of the application package, including the creation
of deployment and management descriptors to standardize the process. The process begins with
defining the use case, requirements, and features, followed by the integration of components such
13
Marketplace
(Developed dApp)
Run time 
library
FOCOM
DMS
dApp
E3 Agent
1
2
3
4
5
6
onboard/verify/unpack
certify/publish
DeploymentDescriptor
ManagementDescriptor
Query the Run Time Library to find certified 
deployment options for the dApp
O2dms
O2ims
User/xApp
O-Cloud
CU/DU
NFO
Catalogue
IMS
Figure 6: dApps LCM diagram.
as intelligent logic, telemetry, and Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) of the dApp. The dApp is
then containerized using tools like Docker for efficient deployment in cloud environments such as
Kubernetes or OpenShift. Once containerized, the Solution AppPackage is created to ensure proper
onboarding, containing key descriptors like the DeploymentDescriptor and ManagementDescriptor,
which standardize deployment and management processes for seamless orchestration.
To ensure secure onboarding, digital signatures and checksums are added to verify the package
source, preventing unauthorized modifications and ensuring the application integrity as it transitions
through different environments.
5.2. Onboarding
The onboarding phase begins with the transfer of the dApp AppPackage, generated during the
development phase, from the marketplace where it was stored. This package undergoes verification
and validation to ensure it is authorized and secure. Once validated, the AppPackage is unpacked,
and its components are stored in a catalog within the SMO (Step 1, Fig. 6). Following this, each
recommended configuration of the dApp is certified and published to a runtime library (Step 2).
The initiation of the onboarding process can typically be triggered either by the SMO or directly
by an operator, who queries the runtime library to locate certified deployment options for the dApp.
In certain scenarios, this decision may also be delegated to xApps or rApps if they are equipped
with the necessary intelligence and reliability to orchestrate and control dApp execution. Indeed,
it can be advantageous for an xApp to be able to initiate the deployment of dApps. This allows
the xApp to use the available dApp for tasks requiring real-time control. The process flow involves
the xApp querying the available dApps in the Run-Time Library through the O1 interface, and
requesting the dApp deployment via the O1 interface (Step 3).
However, in Fig. 6, the process for xApp-initiated onboarding is not explicitly shown as this
procedure requires ad-hoc service models, procedures and functionalities that are not yet available
in the O-RAN specifications, and we hope to cover in future research.
5.3. Deployment
In contrast to the deployment of xApps and rApps, hosted in the Near-RT and Non-RT RICs,
dApps require a different deployment procedure, as they are directly hosted in the DU/CU. dApps
are deployed as Cloud-Native Functions (CNF), adhering to the standard Network Functions (NF)
deployment procedures set out by the O-RAN ALLIANCE [40].
14
Using the SMO framework and the O-Cloud, the dApp is managed through the O2 inter-
face, which facilitates communication between the SMO and the Deployment Management Services
(DMS) of the CU/DU. This direct deployment model allows the dApp to utilize the real-time pro-
cessing capabilities of the CU/DU while also leveraging the flexibility and scalability of the O-Cloud
infrastructure. However, this deployment diverges significantly from that of xApps and rApps, as
it is executed outside of the RIC environments, focusing instead on efficient resource allocation
and real-time operations directly at the CU/DU level. This approach integrates dApps seamlessly
into the CU/DU environment while adhering to the cloud-native principles and ensuring optimal
network function performance. The deployment steps of dApps in the LCM workflow are shown in
Steps 4, 5, and 6 in Fig. 6.
The information flow for deploying the dApp follows a structured sequence, beginning with a
service request initiated by the Network Function Install Project Manager to the SMO for deploying
a new dApp instance on the CU/DU. The SMO processes this request by decomposing it, identifying
the required dApps and their deployment order, and determining the deployment parameters based
on policies or explicit input. The SMO retrieves the CloudNativeDescriptor for the dApp from the
runtime library and directs the O-Cloud Deployment Management Service (DMS) to create the
dApp deployment.
The DMS allocates the necessary compute, storage, and network resources on the CU/DU,
deploys the dApp container(s), and notifies the SMO upon successful instantiation, providing a
Deployment ID. The SMO then updates its inventory with the deployment status, and the dApp
instance reads its configuration and begins operation. Following deployment, the SMO continuously
monitors the dApp’s health, performance, and connectivity, managing its lifecycle, scaling, and
updates as required. Finally, the SMO informs the Network Function Install Project Manager of
the overall success or failure of the deployment request. For a detailed breakdown of these steps,
please refer to Table A.4 in Appendix A.
Finally, we also consider the case where xApps can also request the SMO to deploy a new dApp,
and connect to it, whenever there is a need to perform real-time control. Deployment is performed
following the procedures described above.
6. A Reference Open-Source dApp Framework
In this section, we present a reference implementation and prototype of the proposed dApp
architecture (Sec. 4), based on OAI and a Python framework.
We also present an exhaustive
benchmarking analysis with results that confirm RAN control loop latencies well below 1 ms (i.e.,
below the target threshold of 10 ms).
The reference implementation supports real-time control
loops. The open-source library can thus be used for real-time Open RAN control prototypes. The
use-cases developed as a proof of concept for our framework and their evaluation are discussed in
in Sec. 7.
6.1. dApp Framework
We define a reference dApp framework written in Python, implementing the E3AP as described
in previous sections. Fig. 7 illustrates the UML diagram of our framework. We design three main
classes composing the dApp framework to implement diverse functions: the DApp, the E3Interface,
and the E3Connector classes.
15
E3Interface
_instance : E3Interface
_lock : threading.Lock
callbacks : list
stop_event : multiprocessing.Event
e3_connector : E3Connector
Attributes
__new__()
__init__(link: str, transport: str, proﬁle: bool)
add_callback(callback)
remove_callback(callback)
terminate_connections()
_handle_incoming_data(data)
schedule_control(payload: bytes)
schedule_report(payload: bytes)
Methods
SpectrumSharingDApp
counter : int
limit_per_ﬁle : int
FFT_SIZE : int
noise_ﬂoor_threshold : int
ﬁrst_carrier_oﬀset : int
average_over_frames : int
num_car_prb : int
prb_thrs : int
Attributes
__init__(ota: bool, save_iqs: bool, control: bool, **kwargs)
get_iqs_from_ran(data)
stop()
Methods
PositioningDApp
counter : int
FFT_SIZE : int
ﬁrst_carrier_oﬀset : int
Attributes
__init__(ota: bool, save_iqs: bool, control: bool, **kwargs)
get_iqs_from_ran(data)
stop()
Methods
DApp
e3_interface : E3Interface
control : bool
Attributes
__init__(ota: bool, save_iqs: bool, control: bool, **kwargs)
setup_connection()
control_loop()
stop()
Methods
E3LinkLayer
ZMQ = "zmq"
POSIX = "posix"
Enumeration
from_string(link_layer_str: str)
Methods
E3TransportLayer
SCTP = "sctp"
TCP = "tcp"
IPC = "ipc"
Enumeration
from_string(transport_layer_str: str)
Methods
E3Connector
VALID_CONFIGURATIONS : list
E3_IPC_SETUP_PATH : str
E3_IPC_SOCKET_PATH : str
DAPP_IPC_SOCKET_PATH : str
Attributes
setup_connector(link_layer: str, transport_layer: str)
send_setup_request(payload: bytes)
setup_inbound_connection()
setup_outbound_connection()
send(payload: bytes)
receive() : bytes
dispose()
Methods
ZMQConnector
setup_context : zmq.Context
inbound_context : zmq.Context
outbound_context : zmq.Context
transport_layer : E3TransportLayer
Attributes
__init__(transport_layer: E3TransportLayer)
send_setup_request(payload: bytes)
setup_inbound_connection()
setup_outbound_connection()
send(payload: bytes)
receive() : bytes
dispose()
Methods
POSIXConnector
transport_layer : E3TransportLayer
CHUNK_SIZE : int
Attributes
__init__(transport_layer: E3TransportLayer)
send_setup_request(payload: bytes)
setup_inbound_connection()
setup_outbound_connection()
send(payload: bytes)
receive() : bytes
dispose()
Methods
Figure 7: Unified Modeling Language (UML) diagram of the dApp framework with its components and the two dApps presented in this work used as
example.
16
The DApp Class – First, we define the the DApp abstract class for the management of the
E3SM operations. For each use case, this class will be extended to include functionalities, param-
eters and operations specific to the use case. This class wraps all the E3SM functionalities into a
single entity to simplify and streamline the generation of new children classes and enable the ex-
tension to new use cases. The SpectrumSharingDApp and the PositiningDApp reported in Fig. 7
are two examples of children classes implementing the operations reported in the the spectrum
sharing use case of Sec. 7.1 and the positioning use case of Sec. 7.2. The abstract DApp class uses
the E3Interface class for the communication between with the RAN node.
The abstract DApp class leverages the E3Interface class to facilitate communication with the
RAN node. The E3AP operations and interactions between the RAN and dApps utilize a publish-
and-subscribe mechanism, where dApps register callbacks to access RAN data through specific
RAN function IDs. These data are published via the E3Interface, which is a private variable of
the abstract class, as illustrated in Fig. 7. The setup_connection() class method initializes the
E3 interface and the dApp callback, while the control_loop() method is designed to implement
the data polling and periodically trigger the core logic of the dApp.
The E3Interface Class – The E3Interface class provides standardized APIs for accessing
the E3 interface. It manages the E3AP and facilitates the dispatch of data from the RAN node
to dApps, enabling both analysis and control operations via function calls. The class implements
a singleton pattern, ensuring that all dApps deployed on the same RAN node share the same E3
interface.
The DApp class interacts with the E3Interface by invoking methods such as add_callback()
and remove_callback() to manage subscriptions to RAN data. Additionally, it uses schedule_control()
to schedule the delivery of E3 Control Actions to the RAN and schedule_report() to send E3
Report Messages to xApps. Once a dApp has initiated its control loop, the E3Interface exposes
RAN data to the dApps through the handle_incoming_data() method.
Disaggregated gNB
E3 Subscription 
Manager
POSIX Connector
Server
RAN E3 Agent
RAN outbound 
message dispatcher
RAN inbound 
message dispatcher
Server
Client
Setup Manager
POSIX Connector
Client
dApp E3 Agent
dApp inbound 
message dispatcher
dApp outbound 
message dispatcher
Client
Server
Disaggregated gNB
E3 Subscription 
Manager
ZMQ Connector
REP
RAN E3 Agent
RAN outbound 
message dispatcher
RAN inbound 
message dispatcher
SUB
PUB
Setup Manager
ZMQ Connector
REQ
dApp E3 Agent
dApp inbound 
message dispatcher
dApp outbound 
message dispatcher
PUB
SUB
Figure 8: Design of the E3Connector sockets.
The E3Connector Class – Ensuring fast and reliable connectivity between dApps, the RAN
and xApps is crucial to enable dApp operations and real-time monitoring and control of the network.
For this reason, to understand what are the trade-offs and the best protocols to achieve real-time
control loops, we have implemented and compared several connectivity solutions and protocols.
These efforts have been synthesized in the E3Connector class, which is an abstract class that the
E3Interface uses to create the socket connections between the dApps and the RAN node. The
17
E3Connector exposes a set of methods that are used to perform the initial pairing between the
dApp and the RAN node, receive the messages from the RAN node and send the messages to it.
As shown in Fig. 8, which represents the different logical pairings between the configurations of the
connectors according to the protocols used, the E3Connector creates and manages three different
sockets: the first one is for the initial E3 Setup Request-Response and the E3 Subscription Request-
Response exchanges; the second one for receiving the inbound messages from the RAN unit, i.e.,
the E3 Indication Message and the xApp Control Message, and the last one for delivering to the
RAN node the outbound messages of the dApps, i.e., the dApp Control Messages and the dApp
Report Messages.
In this work, we have created two mutual children classes of the E3Connector, the ZMQConnector
and the POSIXConnector, each one implementing a different data link layer and several transport
layers. The first one is the POSIXConnector implements the message exchange using the classic
POSIX system functions based on the Linux kernel socket implementation. Such functions expose
low-level APIs for IPC like shared memory, pipes, message queues, and sockets and they require
detailed handling for synchronization, data serialization, and transport, focusing on one system or
tightly coupled systems. All the sockets implemented by the POSIXConnector follow a client-server
pattern, having the receiving entity set as a server and the delivering entity acting as a client.
The ZMQConnector class uses ZeroMQ as the link layer, an high-performance asynchronous mes-
saging library, aimed at use in distributed or concurrent applications [41]. ZeroMQ abstracts the
complexity of operations such as connection management and data serialization via simple APIs
calls, and it is designed for both intra- and inter-machine communication with flexible built-in pat-
terns, as discusses below. As illustrated in Fig. 8, our approach leverages ZeroMQ. Specifically,
the initial E3 setup employs a request-reply (REQ-REP) pattern—where the dApp issues the re-
quest (REQ) and the RAN side provides the reply (REP)—since this procedure occurs only once
during the dApp’s lifecycle. In contrast, subsequent outbound and inbound data exchanges adopt
a publish-subscribe (PUB-SUB) pattern, with the data-generating entity acting as the publisher
(PUB) and the data-processing entity as the subscriber (SUB). This choice reflects the need to sup-
port continuous data transfer between the RAN and the dApp, in contrast to the one-time setup
operation.
Both classes implement three transport-layer protocols—Transmission Control Protocol (TCP),
IPC (using Unix Domain sockets), and Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP)—to facilitate
communication between local and remote hosts.
While the implementation can support other
transport protocols, in our design we focus on those that offer reliable message delivery (even if
this introduces overhead) and excludes those, e.g., User Datagram Protocol (UDP), that do not
guarantee data delivery and are not reliable enough for RAN operations. Furthermore, to maintain
consistency, the ZMQConnector class includes SCTP support, despite the ZeroMQ link layer not yet
offering full SCTP compatibility [41, 42]. It is also worth mentioning that we decided to maintain
the possibility to have a connection for the E3 to a remote virtual host, not co-located with the
RAN node, since in the O-RAN vision the disaggregation of the network functions may also happen
across diverse physical nodes in the network.
Data received through the E3Connector socket, regardless of the underlying link and transport
layers, is processed by a callback mechanism operated by the subscription manager. This mechanism
associates newly available data with the registered dApps that require it, thus enabling real-time
data handling and avoiding data duplication. For the PDUs used for establishing communications
between the RAN node and dApps, we employ Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1) definitions
for message formatting in the E3AP and E3SM, adhering to established standard 3GPP and O-
18
RAN message exchange protocols. ASN.1 enables efficient, rapid, and compact serialization of data.
Each class extending our DApp abstract class should implement its own SM and intelligent logic
according to its use case, as shown in Fig. 7.
In this work, we propose two different use cases leveraging dApps based on this framework with
further implementation details discussed in Sec. 7.
6.2. OpenAirInterface and T-tracer
OAI is an open-source project that implements a 3GPP-compliant full 5G New Radio (NR) stack
on general-purpose computing hardware and off-the-shelf Software-defined Radios (SDRs) [43, 44]
It supports both CU-DU split and monolithic deployments, enabling flexibility in testing and devel-
opment of RAN functions. Additionally, OAI provides implementations for key RAN components,
including gNB and UE, offering a robust platform for validating 5G network functionalities and
integrating advanced features such as slicing and AI/ML-based optimizations.
The project implements Open RAN-compliant functionalities, including code functions to con-
nect with the Near-RT RIC (both the O-RAN Software Community (OSC) [45] version and custom
versions such as FlexRIC [46]) and the Non-RT RIC.
We have extended the original OAI codebase by introducing a new E3 Agent module that
facilitates exchanges based on the architecture proposed in this paper, with a particular attention
to the message exchange between the dApp and the xApps over the E3AP, and the RAN control
functionalities employed by the proposed use cases.
It is worth mentioning that OAI integrates T-tracer [47], a programmable toll that provides
an external connection via TCP sockets, enabling developers to extract and collect metrics during
RAN operations for debugging and analysis purposes. Our module integrates with the T-tracer
tool, enabling real-time data sensing and extraction, and making this data accessible through the
E3 interface. We extended the T-tracer socket utilities to support IPC via Unix domain sockets,
enhancing the communication and reducing the overhead generated in the data exchange and, con-
sequently, the latency. Moreover, we developed a C-language implementation of the E3Connector
to integrate it into the OAI codebase through a merge request, avoiding external dependencies
between the dApp framework and cellular stack. This component works in the very same way as
its Python counterpart, enabling different link- and transport-layer tests over different virtual hosts
by design. We will propose the integration of this connector in the OAI main codebase upon accep-
tance of this manuscript. Finally, we extended the OAI codebase to implement the data extraction
and the RAN control of the use cases discussed in Sec. 7, supporting real-time control loops.
6.3. Evaluating real-time capabilities of dApps
We ran more than two hundreds experiments on two different testbeds to assess and evaluate the
capabilities of our framework executing the SpectrumSharingDapp. A detailed discussion of the use
case is provided in Sec. 7.1. In the following paragraphs we focus specifically on the benchmarking
of the framework in terms of real-time control capabilities.
The first test bench for this evaluation is the Colosseum testbed, a wireless network emulator [20]
consisting of SDR-equipped servers and a channel emulator capable of reproducing real-world wire-
less channel effects, such as path loss and fading. The second is Arena [21], a publicly available
over-the-air indoor testbed deployed in an laboratory environment. Both systems used the same
version of OAI and our dApp prototype, running on Dell PowerEdge R730 servers and Universal
Software Radio Peripheral (USRP) x310 SDRs. On Arena, the UE is a One Plus Nord 5G AC2003,
19
while on Colosseum we use the OAI softUE. We use the OAI configuration for the Frequency Range
1 (FR1) band n78, with a center frequency of 3.6192 GHz and a bandwidth of 40 MHz.
Each experiment has a duration of six minutes. However, for the scope of the measurements
reported, we only consider the five-minute window where UE downlink transmissions are active (i.e.,
we exclude the network bootstrap, UE attachment and setup phases). We present the results related
to the performance of the real-time control loop. We evaluated different options for minimizing
Protocol
Overhead percentage (no ASN)
Overhead percentage (with ASN)
TCP
20%
20.05%
SCTP
42%
42.05%
IPC
0%
0.05%
Table 2: Overhead introduced in the E3AP message exchange using the E3Connector.
overhead, focusing on the link layer and the transport layer. Specifically, we considered the two
E3Connector implementation options based on raw POSIX functions and ZeroMQ. Moreover, we
have implemented and evaluated three different options for the transport layer built on top of these
two links, i.e., the TCP protocol, the SCTP protocol and the IPC based on Unix Domain sockets.
Table 2 presents a summary of the overheads introduced by the different transport layers pro-
tocols, i.e., the number of bytes introduced by the protocol stack to guarantee message delivery.
The first protocol we consider is TCP, which is commonly used for inter-process communication of
application that can scale over different virtual hosts. The additional overhead caused by TCP is
20%, making it a good candidate in the case where the dApp is connected across virtual hosts over
the same network. As a second candidate, we evaluated the SCTP protocol since it is an affirmed
transport-layer protocol for cellular networks. Results show that SCTP introduces significant over-
head, which reduces goodput, increases latency, and can potentially slow down the control loop
process and result in late control action enforcement. While this overhead is essential for other
message exchange procedures in O-RAN, such as E2AP, dApps can instead leverage IPC. This ap-
proach eliminates overhead entirely, as IPC allows direct communication between processes on the
same host. Unlike network-based protocols, IPC avoids the need for data encapsulation and trans-
mission across multiple network hosts, significantly reducing latency and processing requirements.
Indeed, SCTP brings many benefits such as multi-homing support, path Maximum Transmission
Unit (MTU) discovery, redundant transmission for reliability. However, these come with additional
overhead, e.g., due to encapsulation and decapsulation of link and transport layers, that can slow
down the flow of the dApp, which make IPC a better candidate to deliver real-time control over
the same host.
Finally, we report the overhead generated by the ASN.1 implementation of the E3AP-SM PDUs
application layer. In the design of such definitions, we opted for a minimalist approach that ensures
the correct implementation of the architectural framework by providing only the necessary PDUs
(i.e., Setup, Subscription, Indication, and Control) to enable a closed control loop, while using an
architecture that can be extended with more PDUs in the future if needed. The ASN.1 implemen-
tation offers a structured messaging infrastructure, but ASN.1 structures and its padding generates
overhead. This overhead is the necessary trade-off for representing the advanced logical interactions
between the dApps and the RAN through the E3SMs. To reduce overhead, in our implementation
we use the Packet Encoding Rule (PER), which is a more compact representation of ASN.1 that
minimizes the overhead by omitting extra information such as tags and lengths of packet fields. For
instance, if fields have a limited number of possible values, the encoding will use just enough bits
20
to represent those values, making the encoded data smaller compared to other encoding rules. In
our experiments, the ASN.1 PDUs generate a constant 0.05% overhead across all protocols, which
adds to the overhead generated by each protocol.
Collect Data
Process Data
Create Control
Deliver Control
Cumulative
Operations
0
100
200
300
400
Microseconds [µs]
Control
[bytes]
0
16
32
128
(a) 384 I/Q samples - Indication size = 1536 bytes
Collect Data
Process Data
Create Control
Deliver Control
Cumulative
Operations
0
100
200
300
400
Microseconds [µs]
Control
[bytes]
0
16
32
256
(b) 768 I/Q samples - Indication size = 3072 bytes
Collect Data
Process Data
Create Control
Deliver Control
Cumulative
Operations
0
100
200
300
400
Microseconds [µs]
Control
[bytes]
0
16
32
208
(c) 1536 I/Q samples - Indication size = 6144 bytes
Collect Data
Process Data
Create Control
Deliver Control
Cumulative
Operations
0
100
200
300
400
Microseconds [µs]
Control
[bytes]
0
16
32
380
(d) 2048 I/Q samples - Indication size = 8192 bytes
Figure 9: Latency measurements for the real-time control loops using dApps with E3AP over ZeroMQ and IPC.
Fig. 9 reports latency measurements for all operations required to perform dApp-based control
using our prototype. Specifically, we measure the latency required to perform the four fundamental
operations of dApp control: Collect Data, Process Data, Create Control, and Deliver Control. We
also report the Cumulative latency, defined as the sum of all the previous operations. Initially,
upon the generation of the RAN measurements, the dApp must Collect Data from the RAN using
the T-tracer and the E3 Indication Message. Subsequently, it moves to Process Data, where the
measurements are analyzed through either a heuristic or data-driven approach. Following this, the
dApp proceeds to Create Control, which involves generating the control action and formulating the
E3 Control Message. Finally, in the Deliver Control stage, this message is transmitted back to the
RAN function.
21
To evaluate our prototype in a practical use case that relies on real-time operations and inference,
we provide results obtained by executing the spectrum sharing dApp (described in Sec. 7.1). As we
will discuss later, the input data to be retrieved consists of I/Q samples, and the output of the dApp
corresponds to the list of PRBs that the MAC scheduler should not allocate due to the presence
of external interference (e.g., incumbents or jammers). We also consider the implementation that
provided the best performance which is the case of an ZMQConnector-based E3 interface serving data
through IPC and ASN.1, and provide results for varying dApp input and output sizes. Specifically,
we considered 16 different configurations by varying two parameters: (i) the size of the payload in
the E3 Indication Messages (i.e., input of the dApp); and (ii) the size of the E3 Control Messages
(i.e., output of the dApp). For the Indication Messages, each I/Q sample is encoded using 4 bytes,
and we evaluated four payload sizes of 1536, 3072, 6144, and 8192 bytes, which correspond to
384, 768, 1536, and 2048 I/Q samples, respectively. For the Control Messages, we defined payload
lengths in bytes based on the number of PRBs blocked by the dApp of the aforementioned use case:
0 (no PRBs), 4 PRBs (16 bytes and about 1 MHz of blocked bandwidth), and 8 PRBs (32 bytes and
about 2 MHz). It is worth mentioning that the list of PRBs to be blocked is of variable size and
depends on the resolution of the Indication Message (i.e., how many I/Q samples in the frequency
domain are fed to the dApp). For this reason, we also consider the maximum number of PRBs
that can be blocked based on the amount of I/Qs being included in the Indication message size.
Specifically, for Indication Message size of 384, 768, 1536, and 2048 we consider Control Messages
of maximum size 128, 256, 208, and 380 bytes, respectively.
Results in Fig. 9 demonstrate that our dApp prototype achieves real-time control loops with an
average aggregated latency of 400 µs, consistently remaining below 450 µs. As expected, the usage of
IPC through ZeroMQ substantially reduces the impact of the socket operations on the total control
loop time, making the operation of Data Collection the indication message and Control Delivery
the fastest operations in the loop.
The major contribution to the elapsing time of the loop is
represented by the Elaboration of the Indication Message, i.e., the ASN.1 decode and the intelligent
control logic implemented by the dApp to analyze the data. This behavior is also highlighted in the
case of Control Messages with size 64 and 95 bytes, shown in Figs. 9b and 9d, respectively, where
the presence of padding in the E3AP PDU causes additional memory allocation, thus increasing
the elaboration time. The average total elapsed time for each of the 16 cases is consistently below
the 1 ms threshold as shown in Fig. 9, which is defined as the limit for real-time use cases involving
the manipulation of I/Q samples (see Fig. 2, Sec. 3).
7. Empowering RAN control through dApps: use cases
After demonstrating that dApps can indeed enable real-time inference in O-RAN systems, in
this section, we showcase two relevant RAN control use cases that benefit from dApps.
These
examples illustrate how the data extraction and dApp-driven control capabilities provided by our
approach can enhance network performance and make network management more agile.
7.1. Use Case: Spectrum Sharing
Dynamic spectrum sharing among multiple wireless access technologies is expected to play a
major role in the next-generation wireless system design. Currently, a popular spectrum sharing
example in the U.S. is the case of the Citizens Broadband Radio Service (CBRS) band, where
mobile network operators may coexist with high-priority incumbent federal radar and satellite
22
OAI gNB and dApp
COTS UE and 
Incumbent
Incumbent 
Interference
dApp
Disaggregated gNB
Incumbent/ 
Interference 
Detection
RAN unit
Sensed OFDM symbols
E3 Agent for I/Qs 
(T tracer + E3AP 
socket)
Send blocked PRBs
E3
E3
Generate list of 
blocked PRBs
E3 dApp 
Termination
Trigger
Callback
t = t + 1
Schedule
Control
E3 Agent for Control 
(E3AP socket)
Store I/Qs
Block PRBs
Collect I/Q samples
before equalization
Figure 10: Intelligent real-time control loop for the PRB blacklisting.
We omit in this figure the initial E3AP
procedures.
systems users in the 3.55-3.7 GHz frequency range. When considering 5G NR systems, the CBRS
band is a subset of the bands n77 and n78.
In our recent work [48], we leveraged our dApp framework to implement a real-time RAN-driven
spectrum sharing system. In this system, the gNB can communicate while simultaneously perform-
ing the spectrum sensing task in the CBRS band. Moreover, the gNB can adapt its communication
parameters (e.g., frequencies or the list of PRBs to not be used for scheduling purposes due to pres-
ence of high interference) whenever a primary incumbent user is detected. The spectrum sharing
dApp that we developed follows the prototype mentioned in the previous section and illustrated in
Fig. 10. The dApp connects with the gNB using the E3 and performs the following tasks:
1. Extract I/Q samples from dedicated symbols reserved for spectrum sensing at the gNB
through a callback registered with the E3Interface, enabling real-time sensing and data
extraction;
2. Leverage an inference algorithm to process the I/Q samples and detect incumbent users by
computing the magnitude of the samples and comparing each magnitude with a fixed threshold
previously calibrated;
3. If an incumbent is detected, create a list of the PRBs affected by the incumbent and that
should not be used by the gNB to schedule transmissions;
4. Deliver such list to the RAN node as a control action through the E3 interface.
We analyzed three different configurations of the spectrum in Fig. 11 using a Keysight EXA
Spectrum Analyzer N9010B as an external observer. The first one, shown in Fig. 11a, depicts an
unbounded TCP downlink transmission of a 5G gNB to one UE.
In this case, the MAC scheduler of the gNB is allowed to use all possible PRBs.
Fig. 11b
introduces a narrowband incumbent in the spectrum of the gNB, making the 5G RF signal clash
with the incumbent RF signal and degrading the gNB-UE performance. When the spectrum sharing
dApp interacts with the gNB, its control logic analyzes the sensed I/Qs and is able to detect the
presence of the incumbent and to create a control action to block the clashing PRBs, making them
23
3.5992
3.6092
3.6192
3.6292
3.6392
Frequency [GHz]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Time Steps
80
60
40
20
Power [dBm]
(a) No incumbent. The presence of the dApp here is negligible.
3.5992
3.6092
3.6192
3.6292
3.6392
Frequency [GHz]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Time Steps
80
60
40
20
Power [dBm]
(b) Incumbent clashing with UE.
3.5992
3.6092
3.6192
3.6292
3.6392
Frequency [GHz]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Time Steps
80
60
40
20
Power [dBm]
(c) Resulting spectrum when the dApp is blocking the PRBs.
Figure 11: Spectrum sharing dApp cases evaluated in the experiments: Sensed Spectrum of a 5G gNB-UE commu-
nication with the incumbent invading the spectrum of the gNB with and without the dApp.
unavailable to the scheduler. Finally, the dApp delivers the control action to the RAN, vacating the
affected portion of the spectrum, as shown in Fig. 11c. Under these conditions, 5G communication
can continue to coexist with the incumbent, albeit with certain limitations.
Specifically, we would like to mention that the currently available OAI scheduler implements
a type 1 resource allocation scheme as defined in the 3GPP Technical Specification (TS) 38.214
Section 6.1.2.2 [49], which requires that the PRBs assigned to a single UE form a contiguous,
non-interleaved sequence of virtual resource blocks.
As a consequence, when we mute a set of
PRBs already occupied by the incumbent, we notice that the scheduler also blocks all scheduling
activities in the PRBs occupying the rightmost part of the spectrum. Although this is a limitation
that does not pertain our spectrum sensing dApp, it is also fair to point out that this specific
implementation based on type 1 scheduler might reduce unnecessarily the list of PRBs that can be
used for data transmission. However, we also point out that in the same specifications, precisely in
Section 6.1.2.1 [49], the standard defines resource allocation of type 0, which allows for the allocation
of noncontiguous PRBs to the same UE. Unfortunately, this latter type is not implemented in OAI
at the time of this writing, and the evaluation of our dApp under this configuration is left for future
studies.
As we will discuss in the next section, the results reported in Table 3 show that, although OAI’s
type 1 scheduler results in an unused portion of the spectrum (right portion of the spectrum in
Fig. 11c), the usage of a reduced portion of the spectrum does not significantly reduce UE downlink
performance.
Performance Evaluation – Table 3 summarizes the experiment results of the Spectrum Shar-
ing use case for the two testbeds and the different test configurations considered. A 95% confidence
24
Testbed
dApp
Incumbent
Throughput (Mbps)
Shared Spectrum?
Colosseum
N
N
71.34 ± 1.28
N/A (gNB only)
Colosseum
Y
N
71.53 ± 0.76
N/A (gNB only)
Colosseum
N
Y
49.52 ± 3.37
No coordination
Colosseum
Y
Y
53.78 ± 1.55
Shared spectrum
Arena
N
N
77.98 ± 1.31
N/A (gNB only)
Arena
Y
N
76.37 ± 1.87
N/A (gNB only)
Arena
N
Y
38.97 ± 2.95
No coordination
Arena
Y
Y
43.86 ± 1.52
Shared spectrum
Table 3: Summary of the performance of OAI and Spectrum Sharing dApp. Average throughput reported with the
95% confidence interval.
interval, using a Z-value of 1.96, was applied to the results and it is reported along with the averages
of each measurements. Given the radio configuration of the experiments presented in Sec.6.3, the in-
cumbent may interfere with the gNB spectrum if transmitting between 3.5992 GHz and 3.6392 GHz.
We present the throughput results across various configurations: with and without the incumbent,
and with and without the spectrum sharing dApp. These results highlight the scenarios where spec-
trum is shared and where it is not. For these experiments, the incumbent signal has been created
using the uhd_siggen software set up to generate an uniform noise transmitted at 3.63 GHz with a
sampling rate of 1 MHz, an amplitude of 0.5 and gain of 90 dB on Arena and 60 dB on Colosseum.
A dBm threshold used to determine whether to block the PRBs was calibrated specifically for each
experimental environment. It is worth mentioning that each testbed is characterized by different
radios with diverse sensitivity, and different RF conditions. For this reason, we set the noise floor
for the two testbeds considered in our analysis to two different value. Specifically, we set the noise
floor to 20 dBm and 53 dBm for Arena and Colosseum, respectively.
The choice of these values is conservative. Indeed, a too high of a threshold value might fail in
detecting incumbent activities in low SINR regimes, and might result in gNB transmissions that
overlap with the incumbent and cause severe interference. Similarly, a too low of a threshold might
misinterpret noise as incumbent signals, and block all PRBs. In our case, we have evaluated the
thresholds heuristically via experiments and data analytics. Note that, in general, a conservative
threshold is to be preferred as incumbents have always priority and gNBs must vacated promptly
the spectrum.
Results in Table 3 show that the execution of the dApp (cases where dApp = Y and Incumbent
= N) does not introduce any significant impact on throughput if compared to the case where the
dApp is not enabled (cases where dApp = N and Incumbent = N). Specifically, in the Colosseum
testbed, the average throughput measured without the dApp is 71.34 Mbps, while we measure an
average throughput of 71.53 Mbps when the dApp is enabled. Similarly, in the Arena testbed, the
throughput decreases slightly from 77.98 Mbps without the dApp to 76.37 Mbps with the dApp.
Although the average values may suggest performance degradation, the confidence intervals in
Table 3 indicate that throughput takes values within the same confidence range, demonstrating
that the dApp introduces minimal overhead and maintains performance parity.
In the case where the Incumbent is present (i.e., when Incumbent = Y), the RF signals of gNB
and incumbent interfere with each other. The lack of spectrum sharing (cases where dApp = N and
Incumbent = Y) causes the gNB to use PRBs affected by interference, which significantly degrades
the UE throughput by nearly 50% across both testbeds. We instead notice that the presence of the
25
spectrum sharing dApp (cases where dApp = Y and Incumbent = Y) is beneficial, as the blocking
of PRBs affected by interference allows the sharing of a portion of the spectrum with the incumbent
while preventing disruptive interference. This brings a slight improvement of the UE throughput
because preventing the use of interfered PRBs results in less interference, lower errors and reduced
need for retransmissions.
7.2. Use Case: Sensing and Positioning
OAI gNB 
and dApp
dApp
Disaggregated gNB
Super resolution 
ranging
RAN unit
Sensed uplink CIR
E3 Agent for IQs 
(T tracer + E3AP 
socket)
Send PRB blacklist
E3
E3
Estimate Distance
E3 dApp 
Termination
Trigger
Callback
Create E3 Report
Message
E3 Agent for Report 
(E3AP socket)
Store CIR 
measurements
E2 Bridge
Collect uplink CIR
Collect UE Distance 
Measurements
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Channel Gain
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Time samples
Near-RT RIC
xApp
OAI UE
Figure 12: Setup for the Sensing and Positioning dApp and UL CIR extracted by the dApp.
Cellular operations at higher frequencies enable the use of wider bandwidths (e.g., Frequency
Range 2 (FR2), Frequency Range 3 (FR3), and THz) and massive antenna arrays. Thanks to these
technologies, beyond 5G systems are expected to offer not only higher data rates but also high-
resolution positioning and environment sensing capabilities [50]. In current UL-based positioning
methods, the gNB derives specific positioning-related measurements (defined in 3GPP standards)
from the UL channel estimates and forwards them to the Location Management Function (LMF)
entity within the 5G core network. These measurements can be encoded into a few bits and are
generally derived from low-complexity signal processing algorithms to comply with the real-time
nature of the gNB.
On the other hand, super-resolution and ML-based algorithms offer precise sensing and posi-
tioning capabilities that outperform conventional algorithms [51, 52]. However, they usually require
data that is not accessible from outside the RAN, such as the CIR. Therefore, dApps are a natural
tool to address this problem.
In our recent work [53], we have used the dApp framework in an UL ranging/positioning system,
where the distance between the UE and gNB is computed based on the UE’s UL CIR available
at the gNB and exposed to the dApp. To demonstrate this method, we have developed a testbed
consisting of an OAI gNB (enhanced with the E3 agent), a ranging dApp, and OAI UE. The dApp
connects with the OAI gNB using the E3 agent and performs the following tasks: (i) extracts
26
multiple wideband UL CIR measurements of a UE from the gNB; and (ii) runs a super-resolution
algorithm [53] on the collected CIR measurements to find the distance between the UE and the
gNB.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Range estimation error (meters)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Empirical CDF
M = 20
M = 60
Figure 13: Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) of the range estimation error.
The above described ranging dApp framework is tested and validated with real-world experi-
ments. The experimental setup consists of a single antenna gNB and a UE communicate over a
line-of-sight channel. The gNB and the UE rely on on the OAI protocol stack and USRP B210
software-defined boards. Furthermore, the SC2430 NR signal conditioning module is used as an
external RF front-end at the gNB [54]. The system operates at band n78 with a carrier frequency
of 3.69 GHz and a bandwidth of 40 MHz.
Performance Evaluation – The performance of the proposed ranging scheme is evaluated
in terms of empirical CDF of the distance estimation error at an UL SNR of −20 dB. The CDF
is obtained from 48,000 CIR measurements by fixing the position of the gNB and moving the UE
in a straight line between 3 to 10 meters with a 1-meter increment. At every point, a total of
6,000 measurements are collected. The ranging dApp is used to extract these measurements as
shown in Fig. 12. The CDF of the range estimation error with a super resolution Multiple Signal
Classification (MUSIC) algorithm with M=20 to 60 number of CIR measurements is shown in
Figure 13. For details on ranging algorithms and prototype design, we refer the readers to [53].
While the ranging dApp here is used to collect measurements during the experiment, which are
then processed offline to obtain the range error CDF, it’s important to highlight that it can also
be used for real-time CIR collection and distance evaluation. The measurement collection latency
performance is similar to that described in Section 6.3.
27
8. Conclusions
In this paper, we introduced an extension of the O-RAN architecture focused on enabling (i)
real-time control in the RAN, and (ii) the interaction of the O-RAN stack with the user-plane of the
network. This is achieved through dApps, lightweight microservices co-located with DUs and CUs,
and holistically managed through components such as the RICs and SMO. We first described the
role that dApps have in enabling new use cases for RAN optimization, including inference based on
I/Q samples, reference signals available at the physical layer, or as complex ISAC systems. Based on
the data and control requirements defined by these use cases, we discussed the architecture for the
integration of dApps and RAN nodes. We also provided insights on the design and implementation
of a set of APIs that RAN nodes need to expose to dApps, coordinated by an API broker called E3
agent. We then discussed the LCM for dApps, including steps for development, onboarding, and
deployment of dApps, as well as procedures for interaction with the RICs and SMO.
Then, we proposed a reference implementation for dApps based on OAI, which is publicly avail-
able to enable research and development of applications and use cases relying on real-time control
loops in Open RAN. We described the dApp framework, based on Python, and the integration with
OAI. We then presented two use cases based on our reference implementation. For the spectrum
sharing one, a dApp performs spectrum sensing at the DU, understands which portions of the spec-
trum are occupied by incumbents, and coordinates with the DU scheduler to avoid scheduling over
it. In the analysis of this use case, results show that while the presence of a continuous incumbent
affects the performance of the 5G network, the use of a dApp enables the sharing of the spectrum
bringing a slight improvement of the 5G network performance.
For the positioning use case, the dApp processes uplink reference signals to extract the up-
link channel response and perform ranging for the UE. We profiled the performance of our dApp
framework, demonstrating that real-time control loops under 1 ms are achievable in O-RAN. In our
implementation, the average control loop duration is slightly less than 400 µs, on average.
As part of our future work, we are extending the dApp framework to other open stacks, including
NVIDIA ARC-OTA [55], and integrate the dApps in a continuous integration, deployment, and
testing framework to continuously test it on and up-to-date gNB protocol stack.
Appendix A. dApp Deployment Process
The following table provides a detailed breakdown of the LCM process for the dApp, outlining
the steps, roles, and conditions involved in its deployment and operation.
Table A.4: dApp Deployment
Use Case Stages and Evolution/Specification
Goal
To instantiate and configure a dApp on theCU/DU, facilitating
its deployment, management, and operationalization directly
via the SMO and the CU/DU.
28
Actors and Roles
• SMO (Service Management and Orchestration):
Orchestrates the deployment, configuration, and lifecycle
management of the dApp.
• DU (Distributed Unit): Possible host of the dApp and
provides necessary network and compute resources for its
operation.
• CU (Central Unit): Possible host the dApp and
provides necessary network and compute resources for its
operation.
• Network Function Orchestration (NFO): Interfaces
with the DU for deploying and configuring the dApp.
• Deployment Management Services (DMS):
Manages the deployment resources on the DU.
Assumptions
• The SMO and CU/DU are available and operational.
• The dApp package has been validated, verified, and
cataloged in the SMO’s runtime library.
• The DU is pre-configured and ready to host dApp
instances.
Preconditions
• The dApp is onboarded and certified within the SMO.
• The CU/DU has the necessary resources and access to the
container images required for the dApp deployment.
Begins When
A Network Function Install Project Manager initiates a request
to the SMO for deploying a new dApp instance on the CU/DU.
Step 1 (M)
The SMO receives a service request to deploy the dApp
instance on the CU/DU.
Step 2 (M)
The SMO decomposes the service request and identifies all
dApps to be deployed and their deployment order.
Step 3 (M)
The SMO determines which DU, or CU, and deployment
parameters to use. This is based on policies or explicit input
from the Network Function Install Project Manager.
Step 4 (M)
The SMO retrieves the CloudNativeDescriptor for the dApp
from the runtime library.
Step 5 (M)
The SMO directs the O-Cloud DMS using O2 to create the
dApp deployment.
Step 6 (M)
DMS allocates the necessary compute, storage, and network
resources on the CU/DU as per the dApp deployment request.
29
Step 7 (M)
The SMO sets up the initial configuration for the dApp, such as
environment variables, network policies, and access parameters.
Step 8 (M)
DMS deploys the dApp container(s) on the CU/DU, setting up
the necessary resources and connectivity.
Step 9 (M)
DMS notifies the SMO that the dApp deployment has been
successfully instantiated and provides a Deployment ID.
Step 10 (M)
The SMO updates its dApp inventory with the new
Deployment ID and deployment status.
Step 11 (M)
The deployed dApp instance reads its initial configuration from
the provided parameters and begins its operation.
Step 12 (O)
The SMO continuously monitors the dApp’s health,
performance, and connectivity. It can also perform scaling,
updates, or redeployment as required.
Step 13 (M)
The SMO informs the Network Function Install Project
Manager of the overall success or failure of the request.
Ends When
The dApp instance is successfully deployed, configured, and
operational on the CU/DU, with the SMO actively managing
its lifecycle.
Post Conditions
• The dApp is actively running and functional on the
CU/DU.
• The SMO has an updated inventory reflecting the
deployed dApp, and lifecycle management is in place.
Exceptions
If the deployment fails, the DMS notifies the SMO, and the
SMO informs the Network Function Install Project Manager to
take corrective actions.
Acknowledgement
This article is based upon work partially supported by OUSD(R&E) through Army Research
Laboratory Cooperative Agreement Number W911NF-24-2-0065. The views and conclusions con-
tained in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the
official policies, either expressed or implied, of the Army Research Laboratory or the U.S. Gov-
ernment. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Government
purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation herein. The work was also partially supported by
SERICS (PE00000014) 5GSec project, CUP B53C22003990006, under the MUR National Recovery
and Resilience Plan funded by the European Union - NextGenerationEU, and by the U.S. National
Science Foundation under grants CNS-1925601, CNS-2117814, and CNS-2112471.
References
[1] D. Johnson, D. Maas, and J. Van Der Merwe, “NexRAN: Closed-loop RAN slicing in POWDER-A top-to-
bottom open-source open-RAN use case,” in Proceedings of the 15th ACM Workshop on Wireless Network
Testbeds, Experimental evaluation & CHaracterization, 2022, pp. 17–23.
30
[2] M. Polese, L. Bonati, S. D’Oro, S. Basagni, and T. Melodia, “ColO-RAN: Developing machine learning-based
xApps for open RAN closed-loop control on programmable experimental platforms,” IEEE Transactions on
Mobile Computing, vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 5787–5800, 2022.
[3] A. Lacava, M. Polese, R. Sivaraj, R. Soundrarajan, B. S. Bhati, T. Singh, T. Zugno, F. Cuomo, and T. Melodia,
“Programmable and Customized Intelligence for Traffic Steering in 5G Networks Using Open RAN Architec-
tures,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 2882–2897, 2024.
[4] M. Dryjański, Ł. Kułacz, and A. Kliks, “Toward modular and flexible open ran implementations in 6g networks:
Traffic steering use case and o-ran xapps,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 24, p. 8173, 2021.
[5] K. Suzuki, J. Nakazato, Y. Sasaki, K. Maruta, M. Tsukada, and H. Esaki, “Toward B5G/6G Connected
Autonomous Vehicles: O-RAN-Driven Millimeter-Wave Beam Management and Handover Management,” in
IEEE Conference on Computer Communications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), 2024, pp. 1–6.
[6] L. Kundu, X. Lin, and R. Gadiyar, “Towards Energy Efficient RAN: From Industry Standards to Trending
Practice,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.11993, 2024.
[7] O. T. Başaran, M. Başaran, D. Turan, H. G. Bayrak, and Y. S. Sandal, “Deep Autoencoder Design for RF
Anomaly Detection in 5G O-RAN Near-RT RIC via xApps,” in 2023 IEEE International Conference on Com-
munications Workshops (ICC Workshops).
IEEE, 2023, pp. 549–555.
[8] A. Tripathi, J. S. R. Mallu, M. H. Rahman, A. Sultana, A. Sathish, A. Huff, M. Roy Chowdhury, and A. P.
Da Silva, “End-to-End O-RAN Control-Loop For Radio Resource Allocation in SDR-Based 5G Network,” in
IEEE Military Communications Conference (MILCOM), 2023, pp. 253–254.
[9] A. Al-Shawabka, F. Restuccia, S. D’Oro, T. Jian, B. C. Rendon, N. Soltani, J. Dy, S. Ioannidis, K. Chowd-
hury, and T. Melodia, “Exposing the Fingerprint: Dissecting the Impact of the Wireless Channel on Radio
Fingerprinting,” in IEEE INFOCOM 2020-IEEE Conference on Computer Communications.
IEEE, 2020, pp.
646–655.
[10] S.-D. Wang, H.-M. Wang, C. Feng, and V. C. M. Leung, “Sequential Anomaly Detection Against Demodulation
Reference Signal Spoofing in 5G NR,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 72, no. 1, pp. 1291–1295,
2023.
[11] D. Uvaydov, S. D’Oro, F. Restuccia, and T. Melodia, “Deepsense: Fast Wideband Spectrum Sensing Through
Real-Time In-the-Loop Deep Learning,” in IEEE INFOCOM 2021-IEEE Conference on Computer Communi-
cations.
IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–10.
[12] R. Chen, J.-M. Park, Y. T. Hou, and J. H. Reed, “Toward Secure Distributed Spectrum Sensing in Cognitive
Radio Networks,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 50–55, 2008.
[13] F. Liu, Y. Cui, C. Masouros, J. Xu, T. X. Han, Y. C. Eldar, and S. Buzzi, “Integrated sensing and commu-
nications: Toward dual-functional wireless networks for 6g and beyond,” IEEE journal on selected areas in
communications, vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 1728–1767, 2022.
[14] Z. Qadir, K. N. Le, N. Saeed, and H. S. Munawar, “Towards 6G Internet of Things: Recent advances, use cases,
and open challenges,” ICT express, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 296–312, 2023.
[15] S. D’Oro, M. Polese, L. Bonati, H. Cheng, and T. Melodia, “dApps: Distributed applications for real-time
inference and control in O-RAN,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 60, no. 11, pp. 52–58, 2022.
[16] W.-H. Ko, U. Ghosh, U. Dinesha, R. Wu, S. Shakkottai, and D. Bharadia, “EdgeRIC: Empowering Real-time
Intelligent Optimization and Control in NextG Cellular Networks,” in 21st USENIX Symposium on Networked
Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 24), 2024, pp. 1315–1330.
[17] P. S. Upadhyaya, N. Tripathi, J. Gaeddert, and J. H. Reed, “Open AI Cellular (OAIC): An Open Source 5G
O-RAN Testbed for Design and Testing of AI-Based RAN Management Algorithms,” IEEE Network, vol. 37,
no. 5, pp. 7–15, 2023.
31
[18] C. Liu, G. Aravinthan, A. Kak, and N. Choi, “TinyRIC: Supercharging O-RAN Base Stations with Real-time
Control,” in Proceedings of the 29th Annual International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking,
ser. ACM MobiCom ’23.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2023.
[19] Northeastern University, NVIDIA, Mavenir, MITRE, and Qualcomm, “dApps for Real-Time RAN Control: Use
Cases and Requirement,” O-RAN next Generation Research Group (nGRG), Research Report, 10 2024, report
ID:
RR-2024-10.
[Online].
Available:
https://mediastorage.o-ran.org/ngrg-rr/nGRG-RR-2024-10-dApp%
20use%20cases%20and%20requirements.pdf
[20] M. Polese, L. Bonati, S. D’Oro, P. Johari, D. Villa, S. Velumani, R. Gangula, M. Tsampazi, C. P. Robinson,
G. Gemmi et al., “Colosseum: The Open RAN Digital Twin,” IEEE Open Journal of the Communications
Society, 2024.
[21] L. Bertizzolo,
L. Bonati,
E. Demirors,
A. Al-shawabka,
S. D’Oro,
F. Restuccia,
and T. Melodia,
“Arena:
A
64-antenna
SDR-based
Ceiling
Grid
Testing
Platform
for
Sub-6GHz
5G-and-Beyond
radio
Spectrum
Research,”
Computer
Networks,
vol.
181,
p.
107436,
2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1389128620311257
[22] M. Polese, L. Bonati, S. D’oro, S. Basagni, and T. Melodia, “Understanding O-RAN: Architecture, Interfaces,
Algorithms, Security, and Research Challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 2023.
[23] A. S. Abdalla, P. S. Upadhyaya, V. K. Shah, and V. Marojevic, “Toward Next Generation Open Radio Access
Networks: What O-RAN Can and Cannot Do!” IEEE Network, vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 206–213, 2022.
[24] X. Foukas, B. Radunovic, M. Balkwill, and Z. Lai, “Taking 5G RAN Analytics and Control to a New Level,”
in Proceedings of the 29th Annual International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking, ser. ACM
MobiCom ’23.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2023.
[25] S. Maxenti, S. D’Oro, L. Bonati, M. Polese, A. Capone, and T. Melodia, “ScalO-RAN: Energy-aware Network
Intelligence Scaling in Open RAN,” in Proc. of IEEE Intl. Conf. on Computer Communications (INFOCOM),
May 2024.
[26] L. Baldesi, F. Restuccia, and T. Melodia, “ChARM: NextG Spectrum Sharing Through Data-Driven Real-Time
O-RAN Dynamic Control,” in IEEE INFOCOM 2022 - IEEE Conference on Computer Communications, 2022,
pp. 240–249.
[27] D. Villa, D. Uvaydov, L. Bonati, P. Johari, J. M. Jornet, and T. Melodia, “Twinning Commercial Radio
Waveforms in the Colosseum Wireless Network Emulator,” in Proceedings of the 17th ACM Workshop on
Wireless Network Testbeds, Experimental evaluation & Characterization, 2023, pp. 33–40.
[28] M. Polese, F. Restuccia, and T. Melodia, “DeepBeam: Deep Waveform Learning for Coordination-Free Beam
Management in mmWave Networks,” in Proceedings of the Twenty-second International Symposium on Theory,
Algorithmic Foundations, and Protocol Design for Mobile Networks and Mobile Computing, 2021, pp. 61–70.
[29] J. Groen, M. Belgiovine, U. Demir, B. Kim, and K. Chowdhury, “TRACTOR: Traffic Analysis and Classification
Tool for Open RAN,” in ICC 2024 - IEEE International Conference on Communications, 2024, pp. 4894–4899.
[30] O-RAN Working Group 3,
“O-RAN E2 Service Model (E2SM), Lower Layers control 1.0,”
ORAN-
WG3.TS.E2SM-LLC-R004-v01.00 Technical Specification, 2 2025.
[31] Y. Chen, Y. T. Hou, W. Lou, J. H. Reed, and S. Kompella, “M3: A Sub-Millisecond Scheduler for Multi-Cell
MIMO Networks under C-RAN Architecture,” in IEEE INFOCOM 2022 - IEEE Conference on Computer
Communications, 2022, pp. 130–139.
[32] Qualcomm and Dell Technologies, “Spectrum Sharing based on Shared O-RUs,” O-RAN next Generation
Research Group (nGRG), Research Report, 10 2023, report ID: RR-2023-05. [Online]. Available:
https://
mediastorage.o-ran.org/ngrg-rr/nGRG-RR-2023-05-Spectrum\_Sharing\_with\_Shared\_O-RU-v1\_0.pdf
[33] M. Giordani, M. Polese, A. Roy, D. Castor, and M. Zorzi, “A Tutorial on Beam Management for 3GPP NR
at mmWave Frequencies,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 173–196, February
2019.
32
[34] H. Cheng, P. Johari, M. A. Arfaoui, F. Periard, P. Pietraski, G. Zhang, and T. Melodia, “Real-Time AI-Enabled
CSI Feedback Experimentation with Open RAN,” in 2024 19th Wireless On-Demand Network Systems and
Services Conference (WONS), 2024, pp. 121–124.
[35] I. Palamà, S. Bartoletti, G. Bianchi, and N. B. Melazzi, “5G Positioning with SDR-based Open-source Platforms:
Where do We Stand?”
in 2022 IEEE 11th IFIP International Conference on Performance Evaluation and
Modeling in Wireless and Wired Networks (PEMWN), 2022, pp. 1–6.
[36] 3GPP, “Management and Orchestration;
5G Performance Measurements,”
3rd Generation Partnership
Project
(3GPP),
Technical
Specification
(TS)
28.552,
3
2022,
version
17.6.0.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.3gpp.org/DynaReport/28552.htm
[37] ——,
“Telecommunication
Management;
Performance
Management
(PM);
Performance
Measurements
Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access Network (E-UTRAN),” 3rd Generation Partnership Project
(3GPP),
Technical
Specification
(TS)
32.425,
6
2021,
version
17.1.0.
[Online].
Available:
http:
//www.3gpp.org/DynaReport/32425.htm
[38] O-RAN Working Group 3, “O-RAN Near-Real-Time RAN Intelligent Controller E2 Service Model 2.00,” ORAN-
WG3.E2SM-v02.00 Technical Specification, 7 2021.
[39] O-RAN Working Group 10, “O-RAN 0perations and Maintenance Architecture,” ORAN-WG10O.OAM-
Architecture-R004 Technical Specification, 7 2024.
[40] O-RAN Working Group 6, “Cloudification and Orchestration Use Cases and Requirements for O-RAN Virtual-
ized RAN,” O-RAN-WG6.ORCH-USE-CASES-R003- v11.00 Technical Specification, 7 2024.
[41] P. Hintjens, ZeroMQ: Messaging for Many Applications.
O’Reilly Media, 2013.
[42] zhchai, “libzmq not support SCTP transport ,” Github issue on the ZeroMQ project repository, 7 2017.
[Online]. Available: https://github.com/zeromq/libzmq/issues/2620
[43] F. Kaltenberger, T. Melodia, I. Ghauri, M. Polese, R. Knopp, T. T. Nguyen, S. Velumani, D. Villa, L. Bonati,
R. Schmidt et al., “Driving Innovation in 6G Wireless Technologies: The OpenAirInterface Approach,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2412.13295, 2024.
[44] F. Kaltenberger, A. P. Silva, A. Gosain, L. Wang, and T.-T. Nguyen, “OpenAirInterface:
Democratizing
innovation
in
the
5G
Era,”
Computer
Networks,
vol.
176,
p.
107284,
2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1389128619314410
[45] F. A. Bimo, F. Feliana, S.-H. Liao, C.-W. Lin, D. F. Kinsey, J. Li, R. Jana, R. Wright, and R.-G.
Cheng, “OSC Community Lab: The Integration Test Bed for O-RAN Software Community,” in 2022 IEEE
Future Networks World Forum (FNWF), Oct. 2022, pp. 513–518, iSSN: 2770-7679. [Online]. Available:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10056724
[46] R. Schmidt, M. Irazabal, and N. Nikaein, “FlexRIC: an SDK for next-generation SD-RANs,” in Proceedings
of the 17th International Conference on Emerging Networking EXperiments and Technologies, ser. CoNEXT
’21.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2021, p. 411–425. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3485983.3494870
[47] R. Mundlamuri, R. Gangula, F. Kaltenberger, and R. Knopp, “5G NR positioning with OpenAirInterface: Tools
and methodologies,” in 20th Wireless On-Demand Network Systems and Services Conference (WONS), 2025.
[48] R. Gangula, A. Lacava, M. Polese, S. D’Oro, L. Bonati, F. Kaltenberger, P. Johari, and T. Melodia, “Listen-
While-Talking:
Toward dApp-based Real-Time Spectrum Sharing in O-RAN,” MILCOM 2024-2024 IEEE
Military Communications Conference (MILCOM), pp. 651–652, 2024.
[49] 3GPP, “NR; Physical layer procedures for data,” 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), Technical
Specification (TS) 38.214, 09 2024, version 18.4.0. [Online]. Available:
http://www.3gpp.org/DynaReport/
38214.htm
33
[50] A. Bourdoux, A. N. Barreto, B. van Liempd, C. de Lima, D. Dardari, D. Belot, E.-S. Lohan, G. Seco-
Granados, H. Sarieddeen, H. Wymeersch et al., “6G White Paper on Localization and Sensing,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.01779, 2020.
[51] A. Nessa, B. Adhikari, F. Hussain, and X. N. Fernando, “A Survey of Machine Learning for Indoor Positioning,”
IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 214 945–214 965, 2020.
[52] X. Li and K. Pahlavan, “Super-Resolution TOA Estimation With Diversity for Indoor Geolocation,” IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 224–234, 2004.
[53] R. Gangula, T. Melodia, R. Mundlamuri, and F. Kaltenberger, “Round Trip Time Estimation Utilizing Cyclic
Shift of Uplink Reference Signal,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.04528, 2024.
[54] SignalCraft, https://www.signalcraft.com/products/test-measurement/microwave-systems/sc2430/.
[55] D. Villa, I. Khan, F. Kaltenberger, N. Hedberg, R. S. da Silva, S. Maxenti, L. Bonati, A. Kelkar, C. Dick,
E. Baena et al., “X5G: An Open, Programmable, Multi-vendor, End-to-end, Private 5G O-RAN Testbed with
NVIDIA ARC and OpenAirInterface,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.15935, 2024.
34
