Distributed AI Platform for the 6G RAN
Ganesh Ananthanarayanan, Matthew Balkwill, Xenofon Foukas, Zhihua Lai,
Bozidar Radunovic, Connor Settle, Yongguang Zhang
{ga,Matthew.Balkwill,xefouk,zhihualai,bozidar,connorsettle,ygz}@microsoft.com
Microsoft Research
Abstract
Cellular Radio Access Networks (RANs) are rapidly evolving
towards 6G, driven by the need to reduce costs and introduce
new revenue streams for operators and enterprises. In this
context, AI emerges as a key enabler in solving complex RAN
problems spanning both the management and application
domains. Unfortunately, and despite the undeniable promise
of AI, several practical challenges still remain, hindering the
widespread adoption of AI applications in the RAN space.
In this work, we attempt to shed light to these challenges
and argue that existing approaches in addressing them are
inadequate for realizing the vision of a truly AI-native 6G
network. We propose a distributed AI platform architecture,
tailored to the needs of an AI-native RAN.
1
Introduction
In 5G, RAN is undergoing a paradigm shift, disaggregat-
ing monolithic base stations into separate components (CU,
DU, and RU) and containerizing them on commodity hard-
ware/software platforms across edges and cloud (Fig. 1). This
enables open interfaces for RIC-based applications, accel-
erating innovation and facilitating new capacity-boosting
technologies like Massive MIMO, mmWaves, and densifica-
tion. 6G will further address long-standing problems (e.g.,
radio resource management, mobility, energy savings) and
introduce transformative uses (e.g., joint communication-
sensing, security, slicing).
The AI revolution, as catalyzed by the current generative
AI phenomenon, has motivated the telecom industry to see
AI as an ideal fit for RAN problems like signal classifica-
tion, traffic prediction, and optimal scheduling. The next-gen
mobile networks, including 6G, will be “AI-native”. AI-RAN
Alliance [1], a telecom industry’s AI initiative, has defined
three promising domains of AI use cases in the RAN:
(1) AI-for-RAN – use AI to optimize RAN performance.
For example, higher frequencies, cell density, and larger an-
tenna arrays will increase the search space in scheduling
with AI-based solutions [4]. Infrastructure management like
predictive maintenance of RAN sites, vRAN troubleshoot-
ing [25], and energy savings [12, 14, 22] will all benefit from
AI.
(2) AI-and-RAN – share compute (CPU/GPU) between
RAN and AI apps. The vRAN is largely underutilized (<
50%) [20] due to overprovisioning and traffic inbalance [10],
Far edge
Near edge
Cloud
Operator premises
<1ms
1-10ms
> 10ms
>100Gbps
<100Gbps
<10Gbps
CU
DU
CU
DU
CU
RU
Figure 1: High-level 5G RAN overview. The RAN in-
frastructure capabilities can vary depending on the
location.
but AI can be leveraged to achieve sharing without violating
the RAN’s realtimeness [10, 11, 21].
(3) AI-on-RAN – use RAN infrastructure for AI apps. For
example, localization from channel data for tracking/auton-
omy [26], context-aware security [5], and latency-critical
video analytics [27] will benefit from interfacing with RAN.
Despite these promises, challenges persist. First, we need
to collect data from vastly and geo-distributed RAN sites for
accurate AI models. Second, AI-RAN use cases vary in com-
pute, latency, and privacy needs, complicating edge-cloud
orchestration. The goal of this research is to design a dis-
tributed AI platform for 6G RAN. We highlight the issues,
arguing static approaches fall short for AI-native networks.
We propose a distributed AI architecture to address these
problems.
2
Background
2.1
Canonical application examples
To help with highlighting the need for a distributed AI RAN
platform, we define two examples (Fig. 2), which we use as a
reference for the remainder of this work.
RAN slicing scheduler – A scheduler allocates radio re-
sources across network slices (inter-slice scheduling) and
across users of the same slice (intra-slice scheduling). Both
schedulers use the traffic demand information provided by
the phones through buffer status reports, to try and predict
the traffic load for the upcoming period [3, 9]. They also use
physical layer sounding reference signals to predict the users’
signal quality. The inter-slice scheduler makes scheduling
decisions at coarse granularities (e.g., seconds) and feeds its
arXiv:2410.03747v2  [cs.NI]  29 Sep 2025
Buffer 
Status 
Reports
Sounding 
Reference 
Signals
Traffic 
Prediction
Intra-slice 
scheduler
Signal 
Quality 
Prediction
Inter-slice 
scheduler
Platform
KPIs
Data 
Imputation 
& 
Aggregation
Anomaly 
Detection
Root 
Cause 
Analysis
RAN slicing scheduler using predicted qualities
Anomaly detection and root cause analysis
RAN
KPIs
Figure 2: Graphs of AI/ML models for RAN applications
decisions to the real-time intra-slice scheduler. This exam-
ple illustrates both AI-on-RAN (predicting load using buffer
status reports) as well as AI-for-RAN (scheduling decisions).
Anomaly detection and root cause analysis – A service
management and orchestration framework tries to detect
RAN-related anomalies and identify their root cause for po-
tential mitigations towards AI-for-RAN. Since the anomalies
can originate both from the RAN and the platform, the appli-
cation collects data from both sources [25]. It also applies im-
putation and aggregation techniques, to deal with noisy/miss-
ing data and to reduce their volume. It then processes the
collected statistics, to detect if an anomaly is present, and if
so, it attempts to localize it and detect its root cause.
From these examples, we see that a typical AI RAN applica-
tion, rather than being a monolith, may consist of a sequence
of blocks. Each block can do its own data pre-processing
and can include an ML model. Those blocks are chained to-
gether into a graph, where the output of one model becomes
the input to the next. Typically the traffic volume between
components reduces from left to right, as more data gets
processed and aggregated.
2.2
Distributed edge infrastructure
The RAN infrastructure is typically deployed across a distri-
bution of far and near edges, extending to the cloud (Fig.1).
As we move from the far edge to the cloud, more compute re-
sources become available for the AI RAN applications. How-
ever, choosing the cloud for deployment (e.g., due to the pres-
ence of GPUs) is not always the right choice. The abundance
of resources comes at the expense of reduced bandwidth and
higher latency. This can be crucial factors for applications
such as the example anomaly detector, which requires large
volumes of input data, or the RAN slicing scheduler, which
is latency-sensitive in its allocation decisions.
3
Challenges to build AI RAN applications
We now discuss the challenges of deploying AI RAN applica-
tions, that make the case for a distributed AI RAN platform.
3.1
Data collection
Different applications require different feature sets, that
might have heterogeneous characteristics in terms of type,
time granularity, etc. For example, the radio resource sched-
uling application might require real-time data from the RAN
network functions, while the anomaly detection might need
to combine aggregate data from both the RAN and the plat-
form in a time windows of seconds. Similarly, the anomaly
detection application might rely on the inter-arrival time
between IQ samples, while the scheduler might require the
actual raw IQ samples carrying the sounding reference sig-
nals.
The heterogeneity in the input features of AI applications
is what makes the data collection process challenging. Ex-
posing raw data from all possible data sources is not a viable
option, as it would lead to a huge volume of data that one
would have to process, store and transmit. For example, cap-
turing all the raw IQ samples from the physical layer of the
RAN translates into several gigabits of traffic per second,
even for a single base station with four antennas. Similarly,
capturing all the CPU scheduling events of a server, in order
to detect if a platform anomaly due to CPU interference is
present, would result in the collection of millions of events
per second.
The current standard practice to bypass this roadblock
is to expose a set of coarse-grained data sources, that are
applicable to a wide range of use cases. These data sources
are exposed through static APIs specified by standardization
bodies like 3GPP and O-RAN. For instance, O-RAN defines
the E2 interface for the collection of pre-defined RAN KPIs,
and the O2 interface for the collection of platform data.Any
change to a data source requires the standardization body
consensus, which can be a very long process. As such, AI
RAN applications end up being developed as an afterthought,
subject to the available data sources, rather than in a truly AI-
native way, where the data collection is application-driven.
3.2
RAN AI application orchestration
The disaggregated nature of the RAN means that its network
functions might be deployed across the edges and the cloud.
This raises a fundamental question as to what should be
the location in which the blocks of AI applications should
reside. Answering this question is far from straightforward.
It involves matching the applications’ requirements to the
capabilities of the infrastructure, which can vary in terms of
compute resources, network bandwidth, latency (Fig. 1) and
privacy.
The many constraints and trade-offs make the deployment
of AI RAN applications a major challenge. First, a developer
needs to understand the underlying constraints which may
differ from one deployment to another. Second, they need
2
AI processor runtime
AI processor runtime
AI processor runtime
Far 
edge  
Telemetry 
& control
Platform
Cloud
Near 
edge  
Telemetry 
& control
Platform
RAN 
Workload
P
P
P
Telemetry 
& control
Message 
Bus
P
Userspace
P
In-kernel
Runtime API
Runtime API
Distributed AI 
Orchestrator
AI Application 
Graph
RAN 
Workload P
RAN 
Workload P
Runtime API
RAN AI app 
block
AI app block (e.g., 
Augmented Reality)
AI app block
 (e.g., video analytics)
RAN AI app 
block
Programmable Probes
Application
(e.g. Augmented Reality)
Application
(e.g. Video Analytics)
RAN AI app 
block
Figure 3: Distributed AI platform architecture.
to carefully choose what data to collect and where to place
the application blocks, to maintain high accuracy, while re-
specting the constraints. Third, deployed applications will
naturally have competing requests for the same resources,
meaning that it falls on the developer to design their applica-
tion with placement flexibility in mind. Finally, AI RAN ap-
plications have to coexist with other AI applications that also
execute on the edge, such as video analytics and self-driving
cars [27]. In the absence of a structured framework, AI RAN
applications have to be developed with ad hoc programming
interfaces and manually distributed by developers.
4
Distributed AI platform for RAN
We present our vision for distributed AI-native RAN plat-
form, with the architecture illustrated in Fig. 3. It builds on
top of three components; i) programmable probes for the
flexible collection of data, ii) AI processor runtimes for the
deployment of AI applications across the distributed com-
pute fabric, and iii) an orchestrator for the coordination of
the platform.
Programmable probes for dynamic data collection – To
allow developers to define optimal feature sets for their AI
applications, we propose the use of dynamic probes for the
platform (i.e., OS kernel) and the userspace (i.e., RAN net-
work functions) to programmatically collect data. Through
the probes, a developer could write small pieces of code to
access raw events and data structures and summarize them
in a custom way. This would expose the right features for
training and inference, while minimizing the volume of gen-
erated data. For example, a developer could leverage a probe
to access the raw IQ samples of the base station to feed them
directly to the application, like in the example of the RAN
slicing scheduler. Alternatively, they could pre-process them
and export a derived KPI, like in the case of the anomaly
detection application. The same approach could also be used
to capture platform data (e.g., capture the incoming TCP
packets and calculate the average inter-packet delay).
While this approach provides flexibility in tailoring the
data collection process to the AI application’s requirements,
it also introduces safety concerns (e.g., illegal memory ac-
cesses). For this, we propose to use probes based on the eBPF
technology, which has recently caught the attention of the
telco industry [8, 23]. eBPF allows the injection of code to
instrumentation points, subject to a static verification pro-
cess that guarantees the safety of the injected code. While
eBPF originates in the Linux kernel, recent advances [8] have
expanded its use to userspace RAN applications.
AI processor runtime – Considering the constraints and
trade-offs that characterize the various locations of the infras-
tructure, an AI-native platform should allow the seamless
deployment of AI applications to the most suitable loca-
tion, without the developer having to worry about providing
location-specific flavors. In the proposed architecture, this is
achieved through the AI processor runtime. The runtime can
be deployed at any location where AI applications are ex-
pected to run and introduces an API for its interactions with
the applications. The runtime should provide the following
functionalities:
– Data ingestion and control: It should enable the ingestion
of data captured through the local programmable probes
and their exposure to applications. It should also enable
the issuing of API calls towards the RAN functions and the
platform for closed loop control.
– Data exchange: It should allow the exchange of data
streams among the AI application blocks deployed in dif-
ferent locations through a common message bus. Similarly,
it should enable the issuing of RPCs for applying control
decisions.
– Execution environment: It should implement the process
of running inference or training tasks, by abstracting the
underlying compute resources (e.g., CPUs and GPUs) and
exposing them to both RAN and non-RAN AI applications.
– Life-cycle management: It should provide a standard inter-
face to deploy, update, and remove AI applications, as well
as to monitor their performance and resource utilization.
As long as it provides the functionalities described above,
we eschew making an implementation prescription because
we believe that the framework should be extensible to include
existing and future runtime environments and messaging
technologies, thus not restraining AI developers. As an exam-
ple, one could consider using Docker containers combined
with a WebAssembly (WASM) runtime as a highly portable
and sandboxed execution environment, while the message
bus implementation could be based on REST or gRPC calls.
Orchestrator – The distributed AI framework is overseen
by an orchestrator (Fig 3) that is responsible for the place-
ment of the AI applications across the AI processor runtimes.
The orchestrator allows for dynamic addition or removal
3
Far edge
(Realtime / CPU-only)
Near edge
(Near real time
CPU + few GPUs)
Data 
Imputation & 
Aggregation
Anomaly 
Detection
Anomaly 
Detection
Cloud
(Non real time
CPU + Many GPUs)
Root 
Cause 
Analysis
Case 1
Case 2
Root 
Cause 
Analysis
Traffic 
Prediction
Intra-slice 
Scheduler
Signal Quality 
Prediction 
Traffic 
Prediction
Intra-slice 
Scheduler
Signal Quality 
Prediction
Case 3
Data 
Imputation & 
Aggregation
Inter-slice 
Scheduler
Inter-slice 
Scheduler
Figure 4: Distributed deployment scenarios for orches-
trated AI applications.
of applications, and also handles dynamic changes to the
available resources (compute and network). It also allows to
plug in diverse policies that trade off between compute at
the different edges and the network load between the edges.
Applications are exposed to the orchestrator in the form
of blocks in a graph. The blocks are characterized compute,
memory, network and latency requirements, as well as other
constraints (e.g., the locations where the block is not allowed
to run due to privacy concerns). The orchestrator takes into
account both the developer requirements and the capabil-
ities of the infrastructure and places the blocks to the AI
processor runtimes that maximize the overall utility of the
platform. Unique to AI workloads are inference parameters
that influence resource demand [27], and hence is a resource
allocation knob for the orchestrator. Examples of inference
parameters would be data sampling rates, or AI models with
varying accuracy for anomaly detection. We propose the AI
RAN applications to expose their parameters to the orches-
trator, and design the orchestrator to dynamically change
them.
We use the example applications of Fig. 2 to explain the op-
eration of the orchestrator. We consider a far-edge location
without a GPU and a limited amount of CPUs, a near-edge
location with a single GPU, and a cloud location with many
GPUs. Under this setup, we consider the three cases of Fig. 4.
In the first case, we install the anomaly detection application.
Given that the root cause analysis model requires a GPU,
the orchestrator places it at the near edge and the rest of the
applications’ blocks at the far edge, minimizing the amount
of outgoing traffic. In the second case, we install the RAN
slicing scheduler application in addition to the anomaly de-
tector. The latency-sensitive inter-slice scheduler requires a
GPU, however the one available at the near edge is already
reserved. Therefore, the orchestrator migrates the root cause
analysis model to the cloud, since it is not latency sensitive,
and deploys the inter-slice scheduler to the near edge. The
latency-tolerant intra-slice scheduler is also deployed at the
near edge, since there is not enough CPU capacity at the
Runtime API
Far edge AI processor runtime
Programmable userspace 
probes
Programmable in-kernel 
probes
Router
Fast IO
(shared memory)
Zero-copy pub-sub channels
OS threads
WebAssembly Instance
AI app
OS threads
WebAssembly Instance
AI app
OS threads
OS threads
Admission control & scheduling
WebAssembly Instance
AI app
Message Bus 
Endpoint
AI processor runtime
Figure 5: Architecture of far edge AI processor runtime.
(preferable) far edge location. Finally, in the third case, we
illustrate how the orchestrator handles the completion of the
anomaly detector and reschedules the radio resource sched-
uler. With the anomaly detector removed, CPU resources
are freed up at the far edge, so the orchestrator migrates the
intra-slice scheduler there, reducing the traffic sent to the
near edge.
5
An efficient far edge AI processor runtime
We advocate that a highly optimized far edge runtime is
required to host real-time AI applications (e.g. the RAN slic-
ing scheduler), as has been demonstrated in recent research
works (e.g., [13]), and as envisaged in the O-RAN concept of
dApps [6]. As such, it needs to have sub-millisecond reaction
times. Furthermore, the far edge is resource constrained, with
only a small fraction of CPUs available for AI applications,
and with a small or no GPU present. Our proposed design is
illustrated in Fig. 5 and has the following characteristics:
Tight integration with the probes – The AI processor
runtime communicates with the probes through fast IO chan-
nels using shared memory and a zero-copy mechanism. This
allows the passing of data between the probes and the AI
applications with very low compute and latency overhead.
Efficient, flexible and secure execution environment
– We have experimented with the use of WASM as an ex-
ecution environment and observed its benefits. It enables
the sandboxing of applications with a very small overhead,
while maintaining near-native runtime performance. The
interaction with the rest of the system for the acceleration of
inference or the data collection can take place through API
calls exposed by the WASM Interface (WASI). For example,
wasi-nn could be used for the exposure of the CPUs and the
GPUs (when available).
Admission control & real-time resource allocation –
All AI applications deployed on the processor runtime need
to request a fraction of the CPU time or the GPU area. An
admission control process ensures that this request can be
met, while also serving other applications. Once deployed, an
4
appropriate schedule is imposed by the runtime (for example,
for the CPU we leverage the Linux deadline scheduler).
6
Implementation & Evaluation
To demonstrate the feasibility and benefits of our proposed
architecture, we implemented a reference far edge AI proces-
sor runtime, based on the design outlined in Section 5, and
also prototyped the distributed AI orchestrator.
6.1
Far edge AI processor runtime
Our reference AI processor runtime is written in ∼5K lines
of C/C++ code and is publicly available at [16]. The runtime
provides both a C++ and a Python API for the development
of applications, to cater the needs of developers requiring
either high performance (C++) or quick integration with
popular AI frameworks and libraries (Python). It should be
noted that the current reference implementation does not
support WASM for deploying applications. The applications
can instead be loaded in the form of shared libraries (.so),
dynamically linked at runtime through a REST-based API.
The extension to WASM applications is left as future work.
For the programmable in-kernel probes, we leveraged
the popular eBPF technology that is part of the Linux ker-
nel [7], while for the userspace probes, we leveraged the jbpf
userspace eBPF framework [8, 15], which has been designed
with lightweight RAN instrumentation in mind. The inte-
gration of the probes with the AI processor runtime is done
using zero-copy shared memory channels that are part of
the jbpf framework.
To evaluate the efficiency of our far edge AI processor
runtime under realistic conditions, we instrumented the pop-
ular open source RAN stack of srsRAN [24] with hooks that
allow us to capture several important events across all the
layers of the RAN (e.g., fronthaul packets, MAC schedul-
ing events, PDCP packets, etc.), and to send back control
decisions [17]. We deployed our custom stack and the AI pro-
cessor runtime on an enterprise scale private 5G testbed [2],
and we measured the latency of delivering data between the
programmable probes of srsRAN and the AI processor run-
time. As illustrated in the violin plots of Figure 6, in a well
tuned system, the communication latency overhead in both
the monitoring and control directions remains below 16𝜇s,
demonstrating the feasibility of our proposed AI processor
runtime design.
6.2
Distributed AI orchestrator
To demonstrate the benefits of distributed AI orchestration,
we developed a proof of concept orchestrator. The orchestra-
tor is capable of dynamically orchestrating container-based
applications across the edge and the cloud, taking into ac-
count their GPU and network requirements.
Monitoring data
Control data
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
Communication latency (us)
Figure 6: Communication latency overhead for moni-
toring and control data to/from the AI processor run-
time.
For our evaluation, we consider a setup composed of a far
edge location with a single HPE DL110 Linux server equipped
with an Nvidia L4 GPU, with 24GB of memory, and an Azure
cloud VM equipped with an Nvidia A100 GPU with 40GB
of memory. As sample workloads we use the SpotLight [25]
AI-based RAN anomlay detection and the visual SLAM of
the Nvidia Isaac ROS framework [19]. The two applications
were chosen as representative examples of AI-for-RAN and
AI-on-RAN scenarios, and they both require a GPU.
By profiling the applications, we observe that SpotLight
requires approximately 4% of the edge GPU and 500Kbps of
network bandwidth for performing anomaly detection for
a single 5G cell, when using the dataset provided by [25].
In the case of the vSLAM, a single instance requires 8GB of
GPU memory and ∼40Mbps of network bandwidth for an
RGB-D camera configured with a resolution of 1280×720 at
15 FPS.
As illustrated in Figure 7, we deploy SpotLight across 10
cells (case 1). The AI orchestrator decides to orchestrate all
the SpotLight instances at the edge location, considering
that the resources of the L4 GPU are adequate (utilization
of ∼40%) and this deployment choice requires shipping no
data to the cloud. Then, we request to deploy three instances
of the visual SLAM application. The remaining edge GPU
capacity is not adequate to accommodate the new workload,
which requires 24GB of memory. As such, the AI orchestrator
migrates the SpotLight applications to the cloud and deploys
the visual SLAM applications to the edge (case 2). The reason
behind this deployment choice of the orchestrator is that
it maximizes the utilization of the edge GPU (100% utiliza-
tion), while minimizing the amount of data that has to be
shipped to the cloud. An alternative sub-optimal deployment
option would be to deploy the visual SLAM to the cloud and
keep SpotLight to the edge, however, this would lead to a
requirement of shipping 120Mbps worth of data to the cloud
(Case 2 - Alt). Along the lines of the discussion of Section 4,
5
Spotlight
x10 cells
vSLAM
x3 robots
Case 1
Case 2
Far edge
Nvidia L4 GPU – 24GB
Azure VM
Nvidia A100 GPU – 40GB
Edge GPU utilization
Backhaul traffic load
Cloud GPU utilization
40%
100%
0Mbps
0%
5 Mbps
24%
Spotlight
x10 cells
vSLAM
x3 robots
Case 2
(Alt)
40%
120 Mbps
60%
Spotlight
x10 cells
AI orchestrator
deployment 
choices
Sub-optimal
deployment 
option
Figure 7: AI orchestrator deployment choices vs sub-
optimal option.
A variant of hybrid design
O-RAN based design
RAN vendor
dApp
RT-RIC
RAN
P
A1
Platform P
xApp
Near RT-RIC
RAN
P
E2
RAN
P
Platform P
O1
O2
rApp
Non RT-RIC
AI processor 
runtime
AI processor 
runtime
AI processor 
runtime
RAN vendor
Proprietary design
RAN
P
Platform P
RAN
P
Platform P
RAN
P
Platform P
Far-edge AI 
processor 
runtime
Near-edge AI 
processor 
runtime
Cloud AI 
processor 
runtime
RAN vendor
RAN
P
Platform P
RAN
P
Platform P
O1
O2
RAN
P
Platform P
rApp
Non RT-RIC
AI processor 
runtime
Far-edge AI 
processor 
runtime
Near-edge AI 
processor 
runtime
First-party AI app block
Third-party AI app block
Message bus
O-RAN interface
Proprietary interface
Figure 8: Deployment options for integration of dis-
tributed AI platform with the RAN.
the orchestrator could also be tailored to take into account
other optimization parameters, such as the latency or the
deployment cost.
7
Open vs Closed architecture and
interfaces for integration with RAN
Despite the progress within the O-RAN community, many
fundamental tensions remain around control interfaces. Sev-
eral major vendors do not support the idea of a near-RT
RIC [18], expressing concerns regarding the network stabil-
ity and security. If RAN vendors allow developers to exert
fine-grained control on the RAN behavior, these may clash
with the proprietary algorithms vendors have implemented.
Also, some vendors argue that exposing sensitive RAN data
may affect the security of the network and the data privacy.
Vendors are also reluctant to open up some of their inter-
faces, as this may reduce their competitive advantage. Our
view is that the distributed AI platform proposed in this
work should be a building block that can be customized ap-
propriately for different use cases. We briefly discuss some
examples of deployment options (Fig. 4).
O-RAN based design – One extreme is an O-RAN based
design (Fig. 8, left), allowing any first or third-party vendor
to deploy AI applications across the RAN infrastructure. One
could leverage the O-RAN RICs and integrate the AI pro-
cessor runtimes in them as apps (i.e., rApps, xApps, dApps).
For the local data collection and control operations, the AI
processor runtimes could leverage the open RIC interfaces
(e.g., E2, O1), augmented with programmable probes and ex-
posed to the AI runtimes through appropriate adapters. The
communication between the AI processor runtimes could be
facilitated by a message bus, which could be standardized
and realized as an overlay network on top of the RIC fabric.
For the far-edge, and considering that there is currently no
real-time RIC specification, one could leverage our far-edge
AI processor runtime design as a blueprint.
Proprietary design – Another extreme is a design, fully
controlled by the RAN vendor (Fig. 8, middle). In this case,
the group that is in charge of the RAN product development
could also be in charge of developing and managing the
AI platform and of defining proprietary interfaces for data
collection and control. A different group could deploy and
manage their own AI RAN applications, without having to
constantly go through the RAN product development group,
to ask them to introduce new features or expose more data.
By decoupling the responsibilities, the vendor can accelerate
its innovation, while still maintaining a full control over the
RAN behavior.
Hybrid design – It is also possible to create a hybrid (Fig. 8,
right), that would be a mix of proprietary AI processor run-
times and runtimes running on top of standard O-RAN RICs.
AI applications could be composed of a mixture of first-party
and third-party AI blocks, where the proprietary data and
control interfaces of the RAN functions can only be accessed
by the first-party AI blocks, whereas third-party blocks can
only access APIs exposed by the standard interfaces. This
would allow the RAN vendor to maintain control over the
RAN behavior, while still allowing third-party developers to
innovate.
8
Conclusions
To realize the 6G vision, we argued about the benefits of
introducing AI in the RAN, from the management and infras-
tructure up to the application layer. Based on these observa-
tions, we outlined the challenges for deploying AI solutions,
stemming from the requirements of the applications and
the characteristics of the RAN infrastructure. Motivated by
these challenges, we proposed a distributed AI platform ar-
chitecture. Its goal is to alleviate the common painpoints
of deploying AI applications in the RAN without being pre-
scriptive about the implementation details. By identifying
the future requirements and by initiating a discussion on the
architecture of a 6G AI platform will help both the standards
and the vendors to create opportunities for introducing AI
solutions in 6G.
6
References
[1] AI-RAN Alliance. Aug 2024. Integrating AI/ML in Open-RAN: Overcom-
ing Challenges and Seizing Opportunities. Technical Report. AI-RAN
Alliance.
[2] Paramvir Bahl, Matthew Balkwill, Xenofon Foukas, Anuj Kalia, Dae-
hyeok Kim, Manikanta Kotaru, Zhihua Lai, Sanjeev Mehrotra, Bozidar
Radunovic, Stefan Saroiu, et al. 2023. Accelerating Open RAN Research
Through an Enterprise-scale 5G Testbed. In Proceedings of the 29th
Annual International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking.
1–3.
[3] Arjun Balasingam et al. 2024. Application-Level Service Assurance
with 5G RAN Slicing. In USENIX NSDI.
[4] Ioannis A Bartsiokas et al. 2022. ML-based radio resource management
in 5G and beyond networks: A survey. IEEE Access 10 (2022).
[5] Arsenia Chorti et al. 2022. Context-aware security for 6G wireless:
The role of physical layer security. IEEE Communications Standards
Magazine 6, 1 (2022), 102–108.
[6] Salvatore D’Oro et al. 2022. dApps: Distributed applications for real-
time inference and control in O-RAN. IEEE Communications (2022).
[7] eBPF. [n. d.]. Dynamically program the kernel for efficient networking,
observability, tracing, and security. https://ebpf.io/.
[8] Xenofon Foukas et al. 2023. Taking 5G RAN analytics and control to a
new level. In ACM MobiCom. 1–16.
[9] Xenofon Foukas, Mahesh K Marina, and Kimon Kontovasilis. 2017.
Orion: RAN slicing for a flexible and cost-effective multi-service mobile
network architecture. In Proceedings of the 23rd annual international
conference on mobile computing and networking. 127–140.
[10] Xenofon Foukas and Bozidar Radunovic. 2021. Concordia: Teaching
the 5G vRAN to share compute. In ACM SIGCOMM.
[11] Xenofon Foukas and Bozidar Radunovic. 2025. The future of the
industrial AI edge is cellular. In Proceedings of the 26th International
Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and Applications. 61–66.
[12] Anuj Kalia et al. 2025. Towards Energy Efficient 5G vRAN Servers. In
USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation
(NSDI).
[13] Woo-Hyun Ko, Ushasi Ghosh, Ujwal Dinesha, Raini Wu, Srinivas
Shakkottai, and Dinesh Bharadia. 2024.
{EdgeRIC}: Empowering
real-time intelligent optimization and control in {NextG} cellular
networks. In 21st USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design
and Implementation (NSDI 24). 1315–1330.
[14] Lopamudra Kundu et al. 2024. Towards Energy Efficient RAN: From
Industry Standards to Trending Practice. arXiv:2402.11993 (2024).
[15] Microsoft. [n. d.]. Userspace instrumentation and control framework
for deploying control and monitoring functions in a secure manner.
https://github.com/microsoft/jbpf.
[16] Microsoft. 2025.
jrt-controller.
https://github.com/microsoft/jrt-
controller.
[17] Microsoft. 2025. jrtc-apps. https://github.com/microsoft/jrtc-apps.
[18] Iain Morris. 2024. AT&T, all in with Ericsson, seems to have shut the
door to xApps. https://bit.ly/3TZzYP0.
[19] Nvidia. [n. d.]. NVIDIA Isaac ROS. https://developer.nvidia.com/isaac/
ros.
[20] Nvidia. 2023. Building Software-Defined, High-Performance, and Effi-
cient vRAN. http://bit.ly/4mjBiIF.
[21] Leonardo Lo Schiavo et al. 2024. YinYangRAN: Resource Multiplexing
in GPU-Accelerated Virtualized RANs. In IEEE INFOCOM. 1–10.
[22] Rajkarn Singh et al. 2021. Energy-efficient orchestration of metro-scale
5G radio access networks. In IEEE INFOCOM 2021-IEEE Conference on
Computer Communications. IEEE, 1–10.
[23] David Soldani et al. 2023. ebpf: A new approach to cloud-native
observability, networking and security for current (5g) and future
mobile networks (6g and beyond). IEEE Access 11 (2023), 57174–57202.
[24] srsRAN. [n. d.]. srsRAN Project – Open Source RAN. https://www.
srslte.com/.
[25] Chuanhao Sun et al. 2024. SpotLight: Accurate, Explainable and Effi-
cient Anomaly Detection for Open RAN. In ACM MobiCom.
[26] Stylianos E Trevlakis et al. 2023. Localization as a key enabler of 6G
wireless systems: A comprehensive survey and an outlook. IEEE Open
Journal of the Communications Society (2023).
[27] Yiwen Zhang et al. 2024. Vulcan: Automatic Query Planning for Live
ML Analytics. In USENIX NSDI.
7
