arXiv:2505.00321v1  [cs.NI]  1 May 2025
1
Edge Large AI Models: Revolutionizing 6G
Networks
Zixin Wang, Yuanming Shi, Yong Zhou, Jingyang Zhu, and Khaled. B. Letaief
Abstract—Large artificial intelligence models (LAMs) possess
human-like abilities to solve a wide range of real-world problems,
exemplifying the potential of experts in various domains and
modalities. By leveraging the communication and computation
capabilities of geographically dispersed edge devices, edge LAM
emerges as an enabling technology to empower the delivery of
various real-time intelligent services in 6G. Unlike traditional
edge artificial intelligence (AI) that primarily supports a single
task using small models, edge LAM is featured by the need of the
decomposition and distributed deployment of large models, and
the ability to support highly generalized and diverse tasks. How-
ever, due to limited communication, computation, and storage
resources over wireless networks, the vast number of trainable
neurons and the substantial communication overhead pose a
formidable hurdle to the practical deployment of edge LAMs.
In this paper, we investigate the opportunities and challenges
of edge LAMs from the perspectives of model decomposition
and resource management. Specifically, we propose collaborative
fine-tuning and full-parameter training frameworks, alongside
a microservice-assisted inference architecture, to enhance the
deployment of edge LAM over wireless networks. Additionally,
we investigate the application of edge LAM in air-interface
designs, focusing on channel prediction and beamforming. These
innovative frameworks and applications offer valuable insights
and solutions for advancing 6G technology.
I. INTRODUCTION
With the remarkable advancement in artificial intelligence
(AI), large AI models (LAMs) now excel at performing real-
world complex tasks. They are cross-modal, highly generaliz-
able, and adept at knowledge transfer, showcasing the vast po-
tential of artificial general intelligence [1]. With revolutionary
model architectures, enormous parameter sizes, abundant data,
and substantial computational resources, LAMs gain unprece-
dented generalization capabilities from pre-training. They can
be adapted to a wide range of downstream tasks with only
a few-shot or even zero-shot learning while achieving com-
parable performance to human intelligence. Such capabilities
open up groundbreaking applications across various domains,
promising a new era of omnipotent intelligence. For instance,
92% Fortune 500 companies have adopted ChatGPT as part
of their operational infrastructure, while vehicles equipped
with Tesla’s FSD have already traveled over 2.575 billion
kilometers. In addition, training a LAM with high-quality
telecom-specific datasets unlocks its potential to effectively
tackle various tasks across telecom domains [2]. However,
many emerging applications (e.g., autonomous driving and
robots) are supported by cloud servers, inevitably leading
to severe privacy concerns and high-latency decision-making.
Z. Wang and K. B. Letaief are with The Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology, Hong Kong. Y. Shi, Y. Zhou, and J. Zhu are with
ShanghaiTech University, China.
Thus, pushing LAMs with strong generalization capabilities to
the network edge in 6G empowers the delivery of personalized,
real-time, trustworthy intelligent services to mobile users.
However, the challenges faced by edge LAM are also
evident. The main characteristics of LAM can be summarized
as three “gigantic” aspects: a massive number of param-
eters, extensive data supply, and substantial computational
demands. For example, GPT-3 has 170 billion parameters
and is trained on tens of thousands of Nvidia V100 GPUs,
utilizing approximately 300 billion words and 570 GB of
training data. Conventional edge AI training relies on federated
learning (FL), where the entire model is trained on resource-
constrained edge devices [3]. This approach is infeasible for
edge LAMs training due to the limited computation, stor-
age, and communication resources of edge devices. For edge
LAM inference, multiple downstream tasks require handling
multimodal input data, which must sequentially pass through
various LAM modules to produce inference results. However,
traditional edge AI inference is limited to handling single-task
and single-modality scenarios, which is insufficient to meet the
multimodal multi-task demands. Given the above challenges
inherent in edge LAM deployment, addressing these issues
necessitates the establishment of distributed and trustworthy
training frameworks, the assurance of resource-efficient and
low-latency inference architecture, and the exploration of its
application in air-interface design, to fully harness the potential
of edge LAM in revolutionizing 6G networks.
Training: The training of edge LAM involves both fine-
tuning and learning from scratch (e.g., full-parameter training)
using sensitive data on distributed edge devices, aiming to
improve learning performance and enhance trustworthiness.
This process involves updating over at least several hundred
million parameters, which is unaffordable for a single edge
device, necessitating the decomposition of the learning model
across devices and servers. Thus, various parallelization frame-
works, e.g., data, tensor, and pipeline parallelism [4], can
be adopted for the decomposition, facilitating real-time and
collaborative training at the network edge. However, existing
parallelization frameworks are primarily designed for cloud
computing centers and centralized datasets, where data privacy
is not a primary concern, unlike in edge LAM training.
Hence, it is crucial to enhance the existing parallelization
frameworks for edge LAMs to safeguard local data privacy and
establish effective collaborative mechanisms while accounting
for diverse requirements of computation, communication, and
storage resources of different parallelization frameworks.
Inference: Edge LAM inference refers to providing real-
time intelligent services for various applications with different
modalities requested from users, thereby improving the over-
2
Collaborative 
Training
Microservice-
Enabled Inference
Air-interface Design

Split federated fine-tuning framework

Looped architecture based parallel pre-training framework

Alternating convergence analysis for key communication and
computation parameters

Rényi differential privacy based privacy protection

Microservice enabled multi-modal LAM inference framework

Diffusion based deployment strategy

Adversarial reinforcement learning based orchestration policy

Lyapunov based long-term optimization

Spatial, temporal, and frequency integrated autoencoder

Federated fine-tuning framework

GNN based encoder for non-Euclidean data extraction

Post-processing module for domain-specific constraints

End-to-end design with bypassing explicit channel estimation

Free from full deployment of LAM

Privacy-preserving training

Enhanced training efficiency by matching edge 
resource with decomposed calculation tasks

Enhanced resource utilization and scalability

Low-complexity and near-optimal deployment

Uncertainty-aware system utility maximization

Budget-aware migration cost minimization

Contextual generalization for dynamic wireless 
environments

Incorporation of spatial, temporal, and frequency 
knowledge

Topology-aware and scalable design
Edge LAM
Technology
Advantages
Fig. 1. Summary of the techniques and advantages in the proposed edge LAMs framework.
all inference timeliness and performance. These multimodal
applications, such as autonomous driving and embodied AI,
involve the sequential processing of user requests through
a series of well-trained neural networks. However, unlike
inference tasks with single modality in traditional edge AI,
these processes face significant challenges such as redundant
computation and low resource utilization due to repeated
module deployments at the network edge. This redundancy oc-
cupies limited edge resources during invocation and increases
the overall inference latency.
Application: AI is a pivotal tool in the design and optimiza-
tion of air-interface technologies, facilitating the development
of intelligent and efficient wireless systems [5]. Despite recent
progress, existing AI-based methods are typically designed to
tackle specific problems in specific scenarios. In particular,
with constrained model size and limited training data, existing
AI-based methods often struggle with poor generalization, lim-
iting their multi-tasking ability in diverse scenarios. This issue
is further exacerbated in highly dynamic wireless networks,
where frequent retraining is required, presenting significant
challenges in terms of communication overhead, computation
costs, and achievable performance. LAMs with billions of
parameters exhibit unprecedented levels of general intelligence
and can be fine-tuned to simultaneously support diverse net-
work management and optimization tasks [6], [7]. Despite
significant progress, it is still challenging to apply LAM
to the design and optimization of air-interface technologies,
as the complexity of wireless channels, intricate network
architecture, and the need for low-latency decision-making
should be considered.
Considering the promising applications of edge LAMs for
future wireless communication systems, this article aims to
provide a comprehensive framework for the deployment of
edge LAMs and their applications in air-interface designs
from the perspective of model decomposition and resource
allocation.
• In Section II, we present a collaborative training frame-
work tailored for edge networks, which encompasses
both federated fine-tuning (FedFT) and full-parameter
parallel training, incorporating novel model decomposi-
tion, resource allocation, and synchronization schemes to
support efficient on-device training at the network edge
[8].
• In Section III, we present a microservice-based edge
LAM inference framework that decomposes LAM into
functional modules deployed at edge devices, reorga-
nizing multimodal downstream inference services as
dynamic microservice flows. We further investigate mi-
croservice deployment, robust orchestration, and online
migration for edge LAM inference, leveraging real-
time learning and optimization techniques to enhance
performance.
• In Section IV, we introduce edge LAM for air-interface
design, with a particular focus on channel prediction and
beamforming design. We detail the design principles that
enable edge LAM to effectively capture the essential
characteristics of wireless data, adapt to dynamic chan-
nel conditions and network topology changes, and make
low-latency decisions across diverse tasks. Additionally,
a concise case study is presented in Section V to
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed framework
in applying federated LAM to channel prediction.
II. COLLABORATIVE TRAINING OF EDGE LAMS
Training LAMs to uncover latent patterns is crucial for
enabling various intelligent applications, which, however, re-
quires significant resources and data consumption. To address
this issue, parallel training that leverages distributed resources
and data can accelerate the training process. Nonetheless,
existing distributed training frameworks heavily rely on cloud
computing and require collecting large-scale data for training.
This incurs overwhelming communication overhead and raises
severe privacy concerns. These issues can be mitigated through
on-device training, which utilizes local computing resources
to perform training while ensuring that raw data remain in
situ [9]. This approach minimizes data transmission to cloud
servers and reduces communication overhead. However, the
limited data, computation, and storage resources of edge
3
Edge device
Edge device
Edge device
Yep!
I’m fine
Just go!
⋯
Edge server
Gradient calculation 
and aggregation
Downlink:
Jacobian matrix
Encoded embeddings
Downlink
Uplink
Representation 
vector
Pre-trained encoder
Frozen
Tunable
Low rank adaptation
Embedding 
module
Frozen
Frozen
Frozen
Embedding 
module
Embedding 
module
Tunable
Tunable
Tunable
Task 
module
Task 
module
Task 
module
Fig. 2. Federated fine-tuning over wireless networks.
devices restrict the direct application of on-device training to
LAM training. To fully harness the representational power of
LAMs while minimizing communication costs and ensuring
data privacy, we propose a collaborative training framework
that facilitates the fine-tuning of pre-trained LAMs and the
full-parameter training of lightweight LAMs.
A. Federated Fine-Tuning for Edge LAMs
Supporting personalized LAM services requires the fine-
tuning of pre-trained LAMs with task-specific datasets, which,
however, are typically isolated at different edge devices and
highly sensitive. To address these issues, we propose a FedFT
framework, as shown in Fig. 2, which enables the collabo-
rative tuning of a global foundation model by coordinating
distributed edge devices [8] in a privacy-preserving manner.
However, it is impractical to deploy a full pre-trained LAM
on each edge device with limited storage and computation
capabilities. This issue can be addressed by constructing a
split FedFT framework, which decomposes the LAMs into the
embedding module, decoder module, and task module, where
the lightweight embedding and task modules are deployed
at edge devices while keeping the computationally expensive
decoder module at the edge server. To reduce training latency
due to sequential communication, we propose a low-rank
adaptation (LoRA) based FedFT framework to decompose
the trainable parameters of the decoder into a series of low-
rank matrices while freezing the original parameters. Thus,
the edge server processes the received embeddings in parallel
with the added low-rank matrices and the original encoder
to form representation vectors. Meanwhile, the low-rank ma-
trices are updated using Jacobian vectors aggregated from
edge devices in the backward propagation. These Jacobian
vectors result in significantly lower transmission overhead
compared to the conventional FL framework. The proposed
FedFL framework differs from the conventional FL framework
in two key aspects. First, the edge server in the proposed
framework transmits representation vectors to edge devices
using unicast transmission instead of broadcast transmission
in the conventional FL framework. Second, the edge server in
the proposed framework performs federated averaging over the
gradient of low-rank matrices instead of the full model in the
conventional FL framework. By folding the insights obtained
from the theoretical analysis into the transmission scheme
design, we develop an online resource allocation algorithm
to enhance the learning performance [8].
Although FedFT protects raw data privacy by aggregating
the gradients of the loss w.r.t representation vectors at the edge
server, these gradients remain vulnerable to inference attacks,
such as gradient inversion by untrusted servers. To address this
issue, we enhance the FedFT system by integrating differential
privacy (DP), where the edge server aggregates noisy gradients
of the loss to ensure sample-level privacy protection. Since the
analytical characterization of DP within the FedFT context
is implicit, we introduce a R´enyi DP (RDP)-based FedFT
framework, which leverages the divergence between proba-
bility density functions of transmitted gradients, computed
locally at edge devices, to determine the optimal noise level.
Unlike conventional FL systems with DP, where the server
aggregates noisy gradients of the entire model, the FedFT
system introduces cascading noise through the chain rule, as
gradients of the loss are multiplied with those of low-rank
matrices. This difference may hinder the convergence of the
considered FedFT system. To address this, theoretical analysis
shall be conducted to evaluate the impact of added noise on
the convergence behavior and privacy guarantees. Then, the
trade-off between privacy and learning performance can be
balanced by adaptively tuning noise injection based on channel
conditions.
B. Looped Tensor Parallelism for Full-Parameter Edge LAM
Training
Mainstream LAMs are essentially transformer-based deep
neural networks (DNNs) with massive neurons, which are
trained with massive data for contextual modeling. Unlike
conventional learning tasks (e.g., ResNet18), which can be
performed on edge devices with limited resources (e.g.,
NVIDIA Nano with 4 GB RAM), full-parameter training of
lightweight LAMs, such as BERT, typically requires at least
10 GB of RAM per batch, far exceeding the computational
and storage capabilities of a single device. This necessitates
the use of parallel training mechanisms (e.g., pipeline and
data parallelism), which, however, are typically designed for
centralized cloud training [4]. To leverage distributed resources
for the training of lightweight LAM, we propose a looped
tensor parallelism framework, which employs a consistent set
of network parameters to represent computationally intensive
transformer blocks, and decomposes network parameters into
distributed matrix computations on edge devices. Since tensor-
based general matrix multiplication dominates the compu-
tation burden in the full-parameter training of lightweight
LAMs, tensor parallelism can decompose large-scale matrix
calculations in the attention and feed-forward networks of
the transformer into multiple small-scale matrix calculations.
These smaller tasks are then performed by different edge
devices, thereby relieving computation overhead.
To circumvent raw data sharing, raw data can be encoded
by split weight matrices at edge devices, which are then
aggregated by the edge server for nonlinear activation. This is
achieved by adopting the transposed matrices in computation
and merging the intermediate activations at the edge server.
4
Precoding
Output 
module
Decoder
(Text & Sketch To Video)
Service 2
Repeated modules
Masking&
Projection
Precoding
Terminal input
Precoding
Output 
module
Decoder 
(Sketch To Image)
Service 1
Masking&
Projection
Precoding
Output 
module
Microservice Architecture based Foundation Model Inference
Output 
module
Decoder 
(Sketch To Image)
Decoder
(Text &Sketch To Video)
Service 1
Service 2
Masking&
Projection
Precoding
“The gazelle 
galloping and 
jumping.”
“The gazelle 
galloping and 
jumping.”
Terminal input
Conventional Monotonic Architecture
Share Across Services
Fig. 3. An illustration of the proposed microservice architecture for edge LAM.
To mitigate the storage constraints of edge devices, a cross-
layer parameter sharing technique can be applied to split
the attention and feed-forward networks, where the cascaded
transformer blocks at different depths reuse the same param-
eters in a looped manner.
The innovative workflow results
in new challenges in matching the edge resources and the
training latency. Specifically, the training latency is influenced
by the heterogeneous computation capabilities of edge devices,
time-varying channel conditions, and limited radio resources.
Besides, the requirement for tensor merging imposes the
need to maintain consistent matrix dimensions across devices,
constraining task sizes to the minimum available storage of
the participating edge devices. Hence, minimizing the training
latency requires the joint optimization of communication,
computation, and storage resources.
III. MICROSERVICE-ENABLED MULTIMODAL EDGE LAM
INFERENCE
Unlike traditional edge AI inference with standalone neural
networks, multimodal edge LAM inference operates as a
sequential process involving multiple specialized module and
each performs a distinct task, such as pre-coding or denois-
ing. However, traditional monolithic approaches for deploying
them result in redundant deployment and calculation, reducing
resource utilization [10]. To address these issues, we propose a
microservice-based approach that decomposes LAM services
into functional components, supporting diverse multimodal
downstream inference tasks by disassembling large models
into lightweight microservices and reusing shared components,
as shown in Fig. 3. Given that both resource availability and
user requests are stochastic, we further investigate deployment
strategy, robust orchestration, and online migration via real-
time status learning and decision making.
A. Microservice Deployment for Edge LAM Inference
Mainstream LAMs comprise modality encoders, input pro-
jectors, a backbone calculator, an output projector, and modal-
ity decoders, facilitating various inference tasks through the
sequential processing of requested data via these modules.
However, the modalities supported by existing single LAMs
are limited. For example, DALL-E accommodates only text
and image modalities, whereas VideoGPT supports video and
text modalities. To meet the complex modal requirements,
different LAMs need to be deployed on edge devices, result-
ing in the repeated deployment of projectors and modality
encoders. For instance, the speech and vision transformer uses
the same vision encoders as VisualBERT while incorporating
a unique speech encoder. This deployment leads to the dupli-
cation of the vision encoder at the edge devices, introducing
redundancy that results in low resource utilization. To en-
hance resource utilization, we propose a microservices-based
inference framework to virtualize the functional modules (e.g.,
modality encoders, input projectors) of multimodal LAMs into
a series of independent microservices, each tailored to perform
a specific function. This architecture transforms the process
into a unidirectional acyclic graph consisting of distinct mi-
croservices, where nodes represent different microservices and
edges denote the data dependencies between them. This de-
sign transforms inference tasks based on different multimodal
LAMs into distinct microservice flows shared among edge
devices, which can be further optimized to enhance overall
efficiency, scalability, and responsiveness to dynamic changes
in user requests.
5
Given the statistical requirements of inference tasks, mi-
croservice deployment emerges as a key concern [11], which
refers to the strategic allocation of computation and commu-
nication tasks to address the mismatch between the stringent
latency requirements and inference tasks. Its goal is to mini-
mize total latency while efficiently utilizing limited resources
across heterogeneous edge devices. Thus, the microservice
deployment problem can be formulated as an NP-hard combi-
natorial optimization problem concerning the discrete-valued
deployment indicator. To efficiently tackle this combinatorial
optimization problem, training a likelihood model that approx-
imates the desired distribution of the near-optimal deployment
strategy is a promising approach. This model allows for real-
time deployment indicator generation based on the status of
edge devices in an end-to-end manner. However, constructing
the likelihood model using the marginal sample probability of
a latent variable model introduces an intractable upper bound
due to the latent variables. To address this issue, the posterior
probability w.r.t the latent variable can be mapped onto a
pre-defined stationary distribution, which can be learned via
diffusion models in a data-driven manner.
B. Microservice Orchestration and Migration
User mobility determines the utility of deployed microser-
vice systems. The uncertainty of user requests can also affect
the system latency and operational costs of the deployed
microservices, thereby reducing the reliability of edge LAM
inference and underscoring the urgent need for reliable mi-
croservice orchestration. Reliable microservice orchestration
in edge LAM inference is defined as the coordination of
computation and communication tasks related to designing a
robust service routing scheme for user requests. Different from
microservice deployment, microservice orchestration assumes
that the same microservice is deployed on at least two or more
different edge devices to respond to user requests, where the
goal is to find a robust routing strategy that maximizes the
long-term system utility under dynamic user requests. This
can be viewed as a Markov decision process, where the reward
function is uncertain due to user mobility, and determined by
the network status and routing designs in previous decision
rounds. Thus, robust adversarial reinforcement learning can
be adopted to establish the desired orchestration policy. This
is achieved by utilizing a primary agent to learn orchestra-
tion strategies that maximize long-term system utility under
dynamic requests and mobilities, while an adversarial agent
generates request strategies aimed at challenging the primary
agent with minimized utility. The desired orchestration policies
can be learned by parameterized DNNs in a data-driven
manner.
Microservice migration is another way to address the user
mobility issue. Specifically, the limited coverage area of edge
servers, coupled with high mobility scenarios (e.g., utilizing
edge LAM inference services on highways or high-speed
trains), may result in significantly high inference latency.
This dynamic fluctuation in resource availability and service
requests requires the migration of both microservices and
user data from the previously serving edge server to a more
suitable one. Due to the spatial and temporal correlations of
user locations, the inference latency is directly determined by
the microservice migration decisions. To maximize the time-
average expectation of system utility, the microservice migra-
tion problem is a long-term optimization concerning migration
costs (e.g., bandwidth, storage, and power), while accounting
for latency, jitter, and packet loss requirements. By employing
Lyapunov optimization, the goal of meeting long-term con-
straints can be transformed into a virtual queue to indicate
the gap between the resource utility and the budget. Inspired
by the drift-plus-penalty algorithm of Lyapunov optimization,
the long-term optimization problem can be transformed into
multiple one-shot migration decision-making problems. This
microservice migration cost minimization problem can be
solved by developing either an alternating optimization algo-
rithm or an online learning algorithm to dynamically allocate
computation and communication resources.
IV. EDGE LAMS FOR AIR-INTERFACE DESIGN
Air-interface technologies have long served as the founda-
tion of wireless communication systems. While conventional
optimization-based methods leverage domain expert knowl-
edge to achieve desirable network performance, they struggle
with scalability in large-scale networks. By leveraging DNNs
to directly establish the nonlinear mapping between system
states and optimization parameters, AI-based methods can
solve diverse network optimization and management problems.
However, they are typically designed to be scenario- and
problem-specific, suffering from poor generalization capabil-
ity. In particular, frequent retraining is incurred to adapt to
rapidly changing network conditions, posing significant chal-
lenges to efficiency and scalability. In contrast, edge LAMs
excel at extracting complex spatio-temporal features of train-
ing data and learning in-context embeddings, demonstrating
enhanced generalization capabilities. Training edge LAM with
large-scale wireless data enables it to function as a universal
feature extractor, effectively capturing intricate patterns and
representations that can be applied to channel prediction and
beamforming [12], [13]. To unleash the full potential of edge
LAM for air-interface, it is essential to investigate the precoder
design for effective processing of wireless data, which is a
unique modality distinct from texts and images, task-specific
generator design to resolve domain-specific constraints and
ever-changing network dimensions, and fine-tuning with the
domain knowledge from the wireless environment.
A. Federated LAM for Channel Prediction
Accurate channel prediction based on historical channel
state information (CSI) data is vital for achieving high commu-
nication performance in highly dynamic 6G networks, where
the channel estimation overhead can be huge because of
the short channel coherence time. Facing the difficulty of
accurately characterizing practical wireless channels, the con-
ventional sparsity-, prony-, and extrapolation-based methods
suffer from limited prediction performance. By learning the
temporal and frequency channel variations in a data-driven
manner, AI-based methods can support channel prediction
6
in both single- and multi-antenna systems. However, exist-
ing AI-based methods suffer from the limitations of poor
channel feature extraction capability because of the small-
sized neural networks and weak generalization capability
because of the scenario-specific design. Empowered with
massive parameter counts and the transformer architecture,
edge LAM is able to model complex time-varying wireless net-
works with in-context generalization, instead of constructing
scenario-specific feature-prediction mappings. Consequently,
pre-training LAM with massive CSI datasets can support
multiple channel prediction tasks, without the need to deploy
multiple configuration-specific models [14]. However, diverse
three-dimensional CSI datasets containing massive training
samples should be collected and transmitted to a central server
for pre-training, incurring excessive communication overhead
and severe privacy concerns.
Federated LAM holds the potential to enable effective
channel prediction while facilitating communication-efficient
and privacy-preserving model training by aggregating only
the gradients of trainable parameters. Specifically, edge de-
vices situated in different locations perceive varying channel
samples under different channel distributions and network
configurations, enriching data diversity and improving model
generalization and adaptability of federated LAM. To capture
the spatial, temporal, and frequency correlation between suc-
cessive channel states, an auto-regressive neural network-based
encoder can be adopted to model the channel dependency,
extracting embedding features and mapping them into token
representations for federated LAMs.
Moreover, low-rank
matrix decomposition methods, such as LoRA, can be em-
ployed in federated LAM adaptation, given their capabilities in
achieving learning performance comparable to full-parameter
tuning with only 5% of the parameters, significantly reducing
both computational costs and communication overhead. By
further specifically designing pre-processing modules for CSI
data, a well-trained model via federated LAM can effectively
support channel prediction across diverse scenarios and con-
figurations.
B. Graph LAMs for Beamforming
Beamforming design is crucial for enhancing the spectrum-
and energy-efficiency of multi-antenna systems, facilitating
directional communication, sensing, and positioning. To meet
the ever-growing demands for high data-rate and low-latency
communications, many advanced multi-antenna technologies,
e.g., extremely large MIMO, reconfigurable intelligent surface,
and holographic MIMO, have emerged to provide unprece-
dented capacity, which, however, poses significant challenges
to beamforming design. Because of the high-dimensional
nature and often coupled optimization variables, beamforming
design problems are usually non-convex, which cannot be
efficiently tackled by optimization-based methods. Integrating
AI into beamforming design holds great promise, yet it also
encounters several critical challenges. First, with constrained
model size, existing AI-based methods cannot sufficiently
characterize the channel model, limiting their ability to effec-
tively map wireless parameters to optimal beamforming design
[15]. Second, because of the problem-specific model training,
existing AI-based methods exhibit weak generalization capa-
bility and cannot simultaneously tackle multiple tasks. Third,
without fully exploiting the underlying network topology and
the permutation properties of the beamforming problem, exist-
ing AI-based methods suffer from poor scalability and achieve
much degraded performance as the network size changes.
Thus, we propose a graph LAM-based beamforming frame-
work, which can leverage massive neurons to enable rich and
contextualized channel feature extraction, utilize high-quality
datasets spanning diverse channel environments to ensure
strong generalization ability, and exploit network topology
and permutation properties to achieve exceptional scalability.
Specifically, beamforming design for various scenarios (e.g.,
hybrid beamforming, joint active and passive beamforming)
can be formulated as graph optimization problems, where the
distributed communication devices (e.g., edge devices, base
stations, and reconfigurable intelligent surface) are represented
as nodes, and the mutual communication and/or sensing
dependencies are represented as edges. To bridge the gap
between non-Euclidean graph data with topological informa-
tion and Euclidean tokens suitable for pre-trained LAMs, a
graph neural network precoder can be adopted to extract
hidden features, followed by a lightweight neural network
that projects these features into the token space. Beyond
adopting low-rank matrix decomposition for wireless-specific
adaptation, projection and normalization modules can en-
sure that the generated beamforming design satisfies domain-
specific constraints, e.g., transmission rate, sensing resolution,
and learning performance. Moreover, end-to-end design that
bypasses explicit channel estimation and directly utilizes noisy
pilots can be further integrated into the graph LAM-based
beamforming design framework, thereby mitigating the perfor-
mance degradation due to the objective mismatch between the
beamforming design and channel estimation modules. This can
be achieved by developing a complex-valued neural network
for encoding pilot sequences into tokens. To further mitigate
the communication overhead caused by the collection of local
CSI and the dissemination of beamforming vectors for cen-
tralized learning, FedFT can be used to enable distributed and
collaborative learning under different network architectures
and configurations.
V. CASE STUDY
This subsection evaluates the learning performance of the
proposed federated LAM for channel prediction.
Important Settings: We employ the LLM-empowered
channel prediction method (LLM4CP) as the base model [14]
and utilize QuaDRiGa to generate 3GPP-compliant channel
realizations as the training dataset. We consider up to 10 edge
servers, each equipped with 5% independent and identically
distributed channel samples.
Evaluation Results: The performance of the proposed
method is illustrated in Fig. 4. For comparison, we consider
three baselines: fine-tuning LLM4CP, gated recurrent unit
(GRU), and recurrent neural network (RNN) using only local
data with a stochastic gradient descent (SGD) optimizer.
7
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Epochs
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Training Loss
RNN
GRU
LLM4CP
Federated LAM With 2 Edge Servers
Federated LAM With 5 Edge Servers
Federated LAM With 10 Edge Servers
Fig. 4. Federated LAM for channel prediction.
Federated LAM achieves lower training loss than these bench-
marks. Its convergence performance initially improves with
more devices but stabilizes over time. By outperforming local
training, federated LAM enables efficient, privacy-preserving
channel prediction for air-interface design.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this article, we have explored the potential of edge
LAMs as a transformative technology for achieving AI-native
6G networks. Our investigation focused on two key perspec-
tives: “model decomposition” and “resource management”,
which are crucial for addressing the challenges of deploying
and utilizing LAMs at the network edge. We proposed a
collaborative training framework that leverages split FL and
looped tensor parallelism to support communication-efficient
and trustworthy fine-tuning and full-parameter training of edge
LAMs. To provide low-latency inference services, we de-
veloped a microservice-enabled architecture that dynamically
matches the computation demands of microservices with the
capabilities of edge devices. Furthermore, we investigated
applications of edge LAMs for channel prediction and beam-
forming. Despite these advancements, edge LAMs face signifi-
cant challenges, including model size constraints due to limited
storage and computation resources on edge devices, high
energy consumption that may deplete battery life quickly, and
privacy concerns arising from potential data leakage during
model training and inference. Addressing these challenges will
require innovative approaches to model compression, energy-
efficient computing, and robust privacy-preserving techniques.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Xu et al., “Unleashing the power of edge-cloud generative AI in
mobile networks: A survey of AIGC services,” IEEE Commun. Surv.
Tut., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 1127–1170, 2024.
[2] L. Bariah et al., “Large generative AI models for telecom: The next big
thing?” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 62, no. 11, pp. 84–90, Nov. 2024.
[3] M. Tao et al., “Federated edge learning for 6G: Foundations, method-
ologies, and applications,” Proc. IEEE, pp. 1–39, 2024.
[4] S. Deng et al., “Cloud-Native computing: A survey from the perspective
of services,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 112, no. 1, pp. 12–46, 2024.
[5] K. B. Letaief et al., “The roadmap to 6G: AI empowered wireless
networks,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 84–90, 2019.
[6] G. Sun et al., “Large language model (LLM)-enabled graphs in dynamic
networking,” IEEE Netw., pp. 1–1, 2024.
[7] D. Wu et al., “NetLLM: Adapting large language models for network-
ing,” in ACM SIGCOMM, Washington DC, USA, Sept. 2024.
[8] Z. Wang et al., “Federated fine-tuning for pre-trained foundation models
over wireless networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., Jan. 2025.
[9] K. B. Letaief et al., “Edge artificial intelligence for 6G: Vision, enabling
technologies and applications,” IEEE J. Sel. Area. Commun., vol. 40,
no. 1, pp. 5–36, Nov. 2022.
[10] Y. He et al., “Large language models (LLMs) inference offloading
and resource allocation in cloud-edge computing: An active inference
approach,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 11 253–
11 264, 2024.
[11] Z. Yang et al., “Latency-Aware microservice deployment for edge AI
enabled video analytics,” in IEEE WCNC, Apri. 2024.
[12] Z. Chen et al., “Big AI models for 6G wireless networks: Opportunities,
challenges, and research directions,” IEEE Wireless Communications,
vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 164–172, 2024.
[13] J. Guo and C. Yang, “Recursive GNNs for learning precoding policies
with size-generalizability,” IEEE Trans. Machine Learn. Commun. Netw.,
vol. 2, 2024.
[14] B. Liu et al., “WiFo: Wireless foundation model for channel prediction,”
Sci. China Inf. Sci., 2024.
[15] Y. Sheng et al., “Beam prediction based on large language models,”
2024.
Zixin Wang (eewangzx@ust.hk) received his Ph.D. degree from the Univer-
sity of Chinese Academy of Sciences. He is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow
with The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
Yuanming Shi (shiym@shanghaitech.edu.cn) received his Ph.D. degree from
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. He is currently a Full
Professor with ShanghaiTech University and an IET fellow.
Yong Zhou (zhouyong@shanghaitech.edu.cn) received his Ph.D. degree
from University of Waterloo. He is currently an Associate Professor with
ShanghaiTech University.
Jingyang Zhu (zhujy2@shanghaitech.edu.cn) is pursuing his Ph.D. degree
with ShanghaiTech University.
Khaled B. Letaief (eekhaled@ust.hk) received his Ph.D. from Purdue Uni-
versity. He has been with HKUST since 1993, where he was an acting provost
and dean of engineering. He is now a Senior Advisor to the President and the
New Bright Professor of Engineering. From 2015 to 2018, he joined HBKU
in Qatar as Provost. He is an ISI Highly Cited Researcher and a recipient of
many distinguished awards. He has served in many IEEE leadership positions,
including ComSoc president, vice-president for technical activities, and vice-
president for conferences. He is a member of the US National Academy of
Engineering.
