1
Energy-Efficient Edge Inference in Integrated
Sensing, Communication, and
Computation Networks
Jiacheng Yao, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Wei Xu, Fellow, IEEE, Guangxu Zhu, Member, IEEE,
Kaibin Huang, Fellow, IEEE, and Shuguang Cui, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Task-oriented integrated sensing, communication,
and computation (ISCC) is a key technology for achieving low-
latency edge inference and enabling efficient implementation of
artificial intelligence (AI) in industrial cyber-physical systems
(ICPS). However, the constrained energy supply at edge devices
has emerged as a critical bottleneck. In this paper, we propose
a novel energy-efficient ISCC framework for AI inference at
resource-constrained edge devices, where adjustable split in-
ference, model pruning, and feature quantization are jointly
designed to adapt to diverse task requirements. A joint resource
allocation design problem for the proposed ISCC framework is
formulated to minimize the energy consumption under stringent
inference accuracy and latency constraints. To address the
challenge of characterizing inference accuracy, we derive an
explicit approximation for it by analyzing the impact of sensing,
communication, and computation processes on the inference
performance. Building upon the analytical results, we propose an
iterative algorithm employing alternating optimization to solve
the resource allocation problem. In each subproblem, the optimal
solutions are available by respectively applying a golden section
search method and checking the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT)
conditions, thereby ensuring the convergence to a local optimum
of the original problem. Numerical results demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed ISCC design, showing a significant
reduction in energy consumption of up to 40% compared to
existing methods, particularly in low-latency scenarios.
Index Terms—Edge inference, edge artificial intelligence (AI),
industrial cyber-physical systems (ICPS), integrated sensing,
communication and computation (ISCC).
I. INTRODUCTION
T
HE rapid advancement of industrial cyber-physical sys-
tems (ICPS) has ushered in an era where the seamless
integration of sensing, communication, and computation is
paramount [1]–[3]. These systems form the backbone of mod-
ern smart industries, enabling real-time monitoring, control,
and automation of industrial processes. However, the esca-
lating complexity and stringent performance requirements of
ICPS necessitate a paradigm shift in their design and imple-
mentation. There exists a fundamental conflict between limited
J. Yao and W. Xu are with the National Mobile Communications Research
Laboratory, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China, and are also with
the Purple Mountain Laboratories, Nanjing 211111, China (e-mail: {jcyao,
wxu}@seu.edu.cn).
G. Zhu is with Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, Shenzhen, China
(e-mail: gxzhu@sribd.cn).
K. Huang is with the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engi-
neering, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China (e-mail:
huangkb@hku.hk).
S. Cui is with the School of Science and Engineering, The Chinese Uni-
versity of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China (e-mail: shuguangcui@cuhk.edu.cn).
processing capabilities and the increasing volume of real-time
sensing data. Hence, artificial intelligence (AI) technology,
renowned for its transformative capabilities, is expected to play
a pivotal role in enhancing the capabilities of ICPS by enabling
sophisticated data analysis [4], predictive maintenance [5],
anomaly detection [6], and autonomous decision-making [7].
Traditionally, deploying AI in ICPS has relied on powerful
computational resources of centralized cloud servers. This
approach involves transmitting vast amounts of raw data to the
cloud for processing and analysis. While effective in leverag-
ing advanced AI models, this method has inherent drawbacks,
including high latency, significant bandwidth consumption,
and potential privacy concerns. The need to transmit large
volumes of data to central servers makes it difficult to meet the
real-time and privacy requirements of industrial applications.
To address these limitations, a new paradigm known as edge
intelligence has emerged, which focuses on utilizing local
data and computational resources at the edge of the network
[8]–[11]. Edge intelligence aims to perform AI training and
inference closer to the site where data is generated, thereby
reducing latency, conserving bandwidth, and enhancing data
privacy [12]–[15]. In particular, edge inference, a key area in
edge intelligence, concerns real-time inference and decision-
making using a well-trained edge-deployed AI model, provid-
ing a platform for intelligent control in ICPS [16].
In the earliest edge inference architectures, edge devices
typically serve a single role in either communication or
computation. Inference tasks are performed either locally on
edge devices or at central servers with preprocessed data from
edge nodes. However, both approaches struggle to meet the
demand for low-latency decision making in ICPS. Limited
computing power on edge devices hampers fast inference
of large-scale models, while constrained wireless resources
restrict rapid data uploading to the server. These challenges are
driving the emergence of split inference and further the joint
design of communication and computation at the edge devices
[17]. Specifically, large-scale AI models are split into two sub-
models before being deployed respectively on edge devices
and the servers. The sub-model at the edge extracts low-
dimensional features from high-dimensional raw data, which
can be transmitted to the server with limited bandwidth for
completion of inference tasks. Within the framework of split
inference, the communication and computation processes are
tightly coupled, jointly determining the inference performance.
Therefore, a joint design coordinated for both aspects becomes
arXiv:2503.00298v1  [cs.IT]  1 Mar 2025
2
essential. To achieve the optimal trade-off between communi-
cation and computation, recent works have focused on various
techniques, including adaptive splitting point selection [18],
[19], model compression [17], and setting early exiting [20],
[21]. Furthermore, taking into account the bottleneck of lim-
ited communication resource, advanced techniques, like joint
source-channel coding [22] and progressive feature transmis-
sion [23], are exploited to minimize communication overhead.
However, the aforementioned edge inference designs over-
look the data collection process, despite that the quality of col-
lected samples plays a cruial role in the resulting inference per-
formance. In ICPS, seamless integration of sensing, commu-
nication, and computation collectively determines the efficacy
of intelligent control. Therefore, conducting a joint design for
integrated sensing, communication, and computation (ISCC)
becomes imperative [24]. Benefiting from emerging technolo-
gies like integrated sensing and communication (ISAC), edge
devices equipped with dual-functional hardware systems have
ability to simultaneously sense, communicate, and compute
[25], [26], which provides an essential foundation for the
ISCC design. However, in ISAC, sensing and communication
coexist as parallel tasks. In contrast, under ISCC, sensing,
communication, and computation are integral procedures of
inference tasks, not only coexisting functionally but also being
interdependent in achieving the same task objective. Moreover,
the absence of explicit objective expressions in inference
tasks complicates the joint design of ISCC, making it more
challenging than that in ISAC.
Recently, there have been a few works considering the
ISCC design for edge inference tasks [27]–[30]. For an action
recognition task, the authors in [27] proposed a novel ISCC
framework with sensing at the base station (BS) and AI
inference at the edge server, and maximized the sensing per-
formance with quality-of-service (QoS) requirements of tasks.
For general classification tasks, the authors in [28] proposed
a joint resource allocation scheme for ISCC directly targeting
the inference accuracy measured by discriminant gain. This
metric allows tractable derivation of the inference accuracy
as a function of sensing, communication, and computation
(SCC) resources, thus unveiling the impact of SCC resources
on the inference performance. Furthermore, to fully exploit
the multi-view features from multiple devices, over-the-air
computation (AirComp) was employed for efficient feature
fusion in [29] and [30], where joint resource allocation and
beamforming design were further optimized in terms of the
derived discriminant gain. From a theoretical perspective,
the authors in [31] proposed an analytical framework for
quantifying the fundamental performance gains brought by
over-the-air aggregation of multi-view features. Moreover,
within the extracted feature vector, the importance of each
feature element was theoretically characterized in [32], which
allows for more fine-grained resource allocation optimization
adapting to element-wise feature importance.
Existing research primarily concentrates on enhancing in-
ference performance through ISCC design under practical
constraints like latency. However, it is essential to note that in
real-world ICPS, battery-powered edge devices, e.g., internet-
of-things (IoT) sensors or actuators, also encounter the chal-
lenging bottleneck of limited energy supply. In addition, in
recent years, AI models have recently experienced exponential
growth in size, significantly increasing the demand for data
acquisition, model computation, and information exchange
[33]. This has exacerbated the dilemma of limited energy for
edge devices, as they must manage not only the computational
complexity of larger models but also growing requirements
of communication and sensing. Hence, minimizing energy
consumption at resource-limited edge devices under QoS
requirements of inference tasks, e.g., accuracy and latency
constraints, is a pressing need for the success of edge inference
in practical ICPS.
As pointed out in [33], energy consumption in edge AI
inference tasks is primarily determined by three key com-
ponents: sensing, communication, and computation energy.
Unfortunately, existing research on energy-efficient edge infer-
ence design often considered these components partially and
separately, resulting in suboptimal performance. For instance,
the authors in [34] focused on resource allocation of sensing
and communication for saving energy, while [35] addressed
the joint design of communication and computation. This
partial or separated design strategy overlooks the coupling
relationship between sensing, communication, and computing.
While it may achieve optimality at a single layer, it results
in energy inefficiency from a holistic perspective. Therefore,
joint design for sensing, communication, and computation is
the key to improving energy efficiency, which is challenged by
the following difficulties. Firstly, the performance of sensing,
communication, and computation jointly determines inference
accuracy, but the nonlinear and implicit coupling between
these factors remains unexplored. In addition, the underlying
mechanisms by which sensing, communication, and computa-
tion individually affect inference accuracy remain unclear. The
lack of explicit characterization of these dimensions hinders
the joint design and efficient resource allocation in ISCC
systems, often resulting in reliance on empirical or heuristic
approaches. To the best of our knowledge, little effort has
been made to elucidate the intrinsic mechanisms by which the
three functional components affect inference accuracy, nor has
a joint design approach been proposed to address the energy
concerns for edge inference in ISCC networks.
Against this background, in this paper, we propose an
energy-efficient ISCC framework as well as a corresponding
resource allocation method for common classification tasks.
The main contributions of our work are listed as follows.
• Energy-efficient ISCC framework: A flexible ISCC
framework is established for energy-efficient edge infer-
ence. In concrete, we adopt the split inference method
with flexible splitting points to meet the latency require-
ment and balance the communication and computational
costs at the edge device. Depending on varying sensing
qualities, we first propose to prune the device-side sub-
model and employ stochastic quantization of features
before transmission. Adjustable pruning ratio and quanti-
zation precision allow adaptive tuning of computation and
communication capabilities to meet the requirement of in-
ference accuracy and reduce redundant energy consump-
tion. Considering the QoS constraints, we formulate an
3
energy consumption minimization problem for resource
allocation design within the proposed ISCC framework,
which jointly optimizes the power allocation, selection
of splitting point, pruning ratio, and the quantization
precision.
• Explicit inference accuracy characterization: For the
challenging task of characterizing inference accuracy in
the formulated problem, taking classification tasks as
examples, we derive a strict lower bound of the inference
accuracy by analyzing the sufficient condition for a
received feature sample can be correctly classified. To
allow tractable optimization and insight extraction, we
further derive an explicit and effective approximation of
the derived bound of classification accuracy. It is revealed
that sensing quality determines the achievable classifi-
cation accuracy. On the other hand, the impacts from
adaptive model pruning and stochastic feature quantiza-
tion can be equivalently viewed as introducing additional
additive noise on extracted features, thereby incurring
performance loss.
• Low-complexity resource allocation: Building upon
these analytical results, we propose an iterative algo-
rithm for the ISCC resource allocation optimization. The
original problem is divided into two subproblems, i.e.,
an accuracy-related subprobblem and a latency-related
subproblem. For the first subproblem, we apply the typ-
ical golden section search method, which guarantees the
global optimal solution. As for the second subproblem,
we succeed to find the optimal solutions by checking
the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions. Further by
alternating iterations between the two subproblems, we
rigorously ensure the convergence to at least a local
optimum of the original problem.
• Experiments: We conduct extensive experiments to ver-
ify the performance analysis regarding classification accu-
racy and evaluate our proposed framework and resource
allocation algorithm based on a typical human motion
recognition task. Compared with existing baselines, the
energy consumption obtained from the proposed method
is greatly reduced, especially with stringent low-latency
constraints. Moreover, it is shown that improving sensing
qualities is of great importance to pursue high classifica-
tion accuracy.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec-
tion II, we offer the details of the proposed energy-efficient
ISCC framework, and formulate the joint resource allocation
optimization problem for energy consumption minimization.
Section III characterizes the inference accuracy under the
ISCC framework. In Section IV, we simplify the resource
allocation problem and propose a low complexity algorithm.
Simulation results and conclusions are given in Sections V
and VI, respectively.
Throughout the paper, numbers, vectors, and matrices are
represented by lower-case, boldface lower-case, and bold-
face uppercase letters, respectively. The set [N] is equal to
{1, 2, · · · , N}. The operators | · | and ∥·∥take the norm of
a complex number and a vector, respectively. Moreover, the
Sensing target
Sensing
Communication
Edge device
Server
Echo
signal
Sensing 
processing
Wireless 
transmission
Inference
computing
Edge device
Server
Split AI models
Joint ISCC design 
1: ℓ
ℓ+ 1 : 𝐿
Computing
Fig. 1. Model of ISCC based edge inference system.
operator |·| returns the number of elements when the input is a
set. The operator ∥·∥F denotes the Frobenius norm of a matrix.
Let R, C, and Z+ denote the set of real numbers, complex
numbers, and positive integers, respectively. The superscripts
(·)T and (·)H stand for the transpose and conjugate-transpose
operations, respectively. We use E[·] to denote the expectation
of a random variable (RV). The operator Exp(λ) is the
exponential distribution with rate parameter λ.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
As shown in Fig. 1, we consider an edge inference system
consisting of an ISCC edge device and a server. The edge
device with limited resources aims at performing AI inference
on real-time sensory data for classification tasks under the
assistance of the server. The ISCC models and the proposed
energy-efficient ISCC design are described in the following
subsections.
A. Sensing Model
1) Sensing signal and processing: We adopt the widely
used frequency-modulated continuous wave (FMCW) signals
with M up-ramp chirps of duration T0 for sensing. With the
normalized FMCW signal x(t) [28], we write the echo signal
as
y(t)=
p
PSh0(t)x(t−τ0)+
p
PS
J
X
j=1
hj(t)x(t−τj)+n(t), (1)
where √PS is the transmit power for sensing, h0(t) denotes
direct attenuation of the target round-trip, τ0 is the round-trip
delay, hj(t) and τj, j ∈[J], denote the reflection coefficient
and signal delay of the j-th indirect path, respectively, and
n(t) is the Gaussian noise.
With the received echo signals, the edge device performs the
following sensing processing to facilitate the subsequent AI in-
ference. To begin with, the raw signal y(t) is sampled with rate
fs, and then the sampled discrete sequence is reconstructed
into a two-dimensional sensing data matrix Y ∈CfsT0×M.
It is worth noting that the column dimension of Y is the
fast-time dimension, while the row dimension is the slow-
time dimension containing the feature in the Doppler spectrum
shift. Then, according to [28], [36], we apply a singular value
4
decomposition (SVD)-based filter for Y to mitigate the clutter.
Specifically, the filtered sensing data matrix is expressed as
¯Y =
r2
X
i=r1
ςiuivH
i ,
(2)
where ςi, ui, and vi represent the i-th singular value, the
i-th left-singular vector, and the i-th right-singular vector
of Y, respectively, and r1 ≤r2 are empirical parameters
determined by experiments. Considering that only the slow-
time dimension of ¯Y is useful for inference task, we convert
it into a vector ¯y by summing up the data along the column
dimension. Finally, short-time Fourier transform (STFT) is
applied to generate a spectrogram x, which serves as the input
of AI model for inference task. To unify and standardize the
learning and inference processes, all spectrograms x have been
normalized to satisfy ∥x∥= 1.
During the sensing procedure, the total latency and energy
consumption are calculated as Tsen = T0M and Esen = PSTsen,
respectively. Without loss of generality, we ignore the latency
and energy consumption associated with the signal processing.
2) Sensing metrics: According to (1), the desired signal is
interfered by higher-order scattering and noise. Consequently,
the quality of the obtained spectrograms monotonically im-
proves with the increase in transmit power PS until the
noise becomes negligible. The experimental results in [36]
confirmed this conclusion by using the structural similarity
(SSIM) index as the metric. Moreover, discriminant gain,
derived from the well-established Kullback-Leibler (KL) di-
vergence, is widely used as a substitute metric for inference
accuracy [23], [28]. Direct inspection of the discriminant gain
in Eq. (17) of [28] reveals that it monotonically increases
with sensing power, thereby establishing a positive relationship
between the inference performance and sensing power.
B. Split Inference Model
Consider a pre-trained deep neural network (DNN) with
L layers for the AI inference. Due to limited computing re-
sources and energy of the edge device, it is usually challenging
to meet low latency requirements for the DNN calculations at
the edge device. Additionally, it is often overloaded to support
the direct upload of high-dimensional data sample to the server
with limited wireless resources. To address these issues, we
split the large-scale DNN at layer ℓ∈L, which is known as
splitting point and L denotes its feasible set, and deploy the
sub-models separately on the edge device and the server, as
illustrated in Fig. 1. Note that by selecting different splitting
points, all possible situations are covered with this general
splitting model. For example, when ℓ= L, it represents the
case that the AI inference is performed completely at the edge
device.
To further reduce the computational burden on edge devices,
in practice, the well-trained sub-models are usually pruned
before deploying at the edge device via the existing model
pruning methods [37]–[39]. Let ρ ∈(0, 1] denote the pruning
ratio for the input sub-model at the edge, which represents the
proportion of remaining nodes to the total number of nodes.
Based on sensing quality and communication capability, we
aim to adaptively adjust the inference ability of DNN by
selecting a proper value of ρ, thereby achieving full utilization
of the resources. We denote the number of floating point
operations (FLOPs) required for computing the l-th layer by
λ(l, ρ). According to [18], it follows
λ(l, ρ)=



 2γl−1ψ2
l ρ−1

αlβlγl,
Conv,
αlβlγlψ2
l ,
MP,
(2nl−1ρ −1) nl,
FC,
(3)
where Conv, MP, and FC denote the convolutional, max-
pooling, and fully-connected layers, respectively, αl, βl, γl,
and ψl denote the height, width, channels of the output feature
map, and the filter size of the l-th layer, respectively, and
nl denotes the number of neurons at the l-th layer. Then,
the computation latency at the edge device and the server is
respectively expressed as
Tcomp,e =
Pℓ
l=1 λ(l, ρ)
νe
,
Tcomp,s =
PL
l=ℓ+1 λ(l, 1)
νs
,
(4)
where νe and νs denote the computation capacity of the edge
device and server, respectively. They represent the number of
FLOPs per second. According to Lemma 1 in [40], the energy
consumption for computation at the edge device equals
Ecomp = κ
ℓ
X
l=1
λ(l, ρ)ν2
e ,
(5)
where κ represents the effective switched capacitance depend-
ing on the chip architecture. In the considered edge inference
system, the primary concern is the limited energy available at
the edge device, while the central server typically has ample
resources. Hence, the energy consumption at the server is not
the focus of our study, and it is neglected for simplicity. Also,
we assume a maximum CPU frequency for computation at
the server to minimize computation latency and assist edge
inference.
C. Communication Model
Let f ∈RNℓdenote the output feature of the sub-model at
the edge device with size Nℓ. In the communication procedure,
the edge device uploads it to the server via a wireless link.
Firstly, we adopt the typical stochastic quantization method
[41], [42] to quantize the continuous feature elements into
discrete ones for the convenience of transmission. Without loss
of generality, we assume that |fi| ∈[fmin, fmax], ∀i ∈[Nℓ].
With Q quantization bits, we divide the interval [fmin, fmax]
evenly into 2Q−1 −1 quantization intervals and the i-th knob
is denoted by τi = fmin+ fmax−fmin
2Q−1−1 i for i = 0, · · · , 2Q−1−1.
Next, we define the quantization function as
Q(x) =
(
sign(x)τi
w.p.
τi+1−|x|
τi+1−τi ,
sign(x)τi+1
w.p.
|x|−τi
τi+1−τi ,
(6)
where |x| ∈[τi, τi+1) and sign(·) represents the signum
function. Based on the quantization in (6), we obtain a
quantized version of f
for transmission, i.e., Q (f)
≜
5
Ideal result
Feature extractor
𝐱∈ℝ𝐷
𝐟∈ℝ𝑁ℓ
Classifier 
Spectrogram
Ideal feature
𝐟+ 𝐞1
𝒬(⋅)
መ𝐟= 𝐟+ 𝐞1 + 𝐞2
Extracted feature
Ideal case without imperfection
Pruning
Received  feature
Quantizer
Actual case
Actual result
𝐞1: model pruning error
𝐞2: quantization error
Classifier 
𝐘
Sensing data
Fig. 2. Comparison between the classification results obtained from the proposed approach and the ideal case.
[Q (f1) , · · · , Q (fNℓ)]T . Moreover, the total number of bits
needed for transmission equals NℓQ.
After the quantization, the edge device transmits Q (f) to
the server via a wireless channel. We express the achievable
rate as
r = B log2

1 + gPC
BN0

,
(7)
where B is the available bandwidth, g represents the channel
gain between the edge device and server, PC is the transmit
power, and N0 denotes the noise power density. In order
to guarantee lossless recovery of Q (f) at the receiver, the
minimum transmission latency must be
Tcomm = NℓQ
r
=
NℓQ
B log2

1 + gPC
BN0
.
(8)
Moreover, the energy consumption during the communication
procedure amounts to
Ecomm = PCTcomm =
NℓQPC
B log2

1 + gPC
BN0
.
(9)
D. Problem Formulation
With the considered edge inference task, sensing, commu-
nication, and computation are entirely coupled and the ISCC
jointly determines the achievable performance. To meet the
urgent demand of high-accuracy and low-latency edge infer-
ence, it is of great significance to explore an efficient resource
management method at the resource-limited edge device and
seek the optimal trade-offs among sensing, communication,
and computation. The problem of resource allocation problem
for the considered ISCC is formulated as follows:
minimize
ℓ,ρ,PS,PC,νe,Q Esen + Ecomp + Ecomm
subject to C1 : Rp ≥Rt,
C2 : Tsen + Tcomp,e + Tcomp,s + Tcomm ≤Tmax,
C3 : ℓ∈L,
C4 : ρ ∈(0, 1],
C5 : PS, PC ≤Pmax,
C6 : νe ≤νmax,
C7 : Q ∈Z+,
(10)
where Rp denotes the inference accuracy, Rt is a hyper-
parameter and denotes the target inference accuracy, Tmax
is the maximum permitted latency, and Pmax and νmax de-
note the maximum transmit power and computation capacity
of the edge device, respectively. The maximum permitted
latency Tmax is defined as the target latency minus other
potential delays, such as queuing delay. It serves as the upper
bound for the total latency of the sensing, communication,
and computation processes. The problem in (10) aims at
minimizing the energy consumption required to achieve the
inference accuracy and latency requirements under constraints
C1 and C2, through the joint optimization of splitting point,
pruning ratio, power allocation, and the number of quantization
bits. The remaining constraints, i.e., C2 −C7, correspond to
realistic constraints on these optimization variables. Moreover,
in the considered single-user scenario, the entire bandwidth is
allocated to the edge device for data upload. This allocation
improves communication capability by increasing the available
bandwidth, thereby enhancing inference performance without
incurring additional energy consumption.
Through the formulated optimization problem in (10), we
aim to achieve the optimal trade-offs from the following two
perspectives.
Latency trade-off: Given the assumption of fixed sensing
time, we primarily consider the trade-off between communica-
tion and computation from the perspective of latency. For edge
devices with limited resource, we optimize the splitting point
to adaptively adjust the computational and communication
burdens on the device, thus achieving the optimal latency.
Capability trade-off: To achieve the desired inference accu-
racy, we strive to balance communication, sensing, and com-
putation capabilities at the edge device, thereby minimizing
the total energy consumption. Specifically, the sensing ability
is adjusted through the sensing power, PS. Computational
capability, which refers to the AI model’s ability to distinguish
the input data samples, can be altered by adjusting the pruning
rate ρ, with a larger ρ indicating a stronger model capability.
Additionally, communication capability is measured by the
number of quantization bits, Q, with higher quantization
accuracy leading to more precise data transmission.
6
TABLE I
SUMMARY OF MAIN NOTATIONS IN SECTION III
Notation
Definition
f
Ideal feature vector without error
ˆf
Received feature vector at the server
e1
Feature extraction error induced by model pruning
e2
Feature quantization error
Wl
Weight matrix associated with the l-th layer
ˆ
Wl
Pruned version of Wl
Nl
Size of the output feature in the l-th layer
Ml
Number of parameters in Wl
δ(PS, ℓ)
Classification margin under sensing power PS and
splitting point ℓ
R0(PS)
Ideal classification accuracy with error-free feature
and sensing power PS
s
Lower bound for the minimum score of the obtained
data samples
III. INFERENCE ACCURACY CHARACTERIZATION
To pave the way for solving the problem in (10), it is
a prerequisite to provide an effective characterization of the
inference accuracy with respect to the optimization variables
in (10). For the ease of exposition, we take classification tasks
as an example in the subsequent analysis, by examining the
essential sources of inference errors, we derive a strict lower
bound on classification accuracy, as well as a closed-form
approximation of the bound. The main notations functions
used in this section are listed in Table I.
To begin with, we revisit the proposed approach in Fig. 2.
Based on the split inference, we name the sub-models at
the transmitter and receiver as feature extractor and classifier,
respectively, according to their functions. Compared with the
ideal case without model pruning and quantized transmission,
the proposed approach suffers from two sources of errors,
i.e., feature extraction error from the pruned model and
quantization error. We respectively denote them as e1 and e2
and then denote the received feature vector at the receiver as
ˆf ≜f + e1 + e2, where f is the extracted feature in the ideal
case.
Next, we explore the theoretical impact of the errors in
the received features on classification accuracy from the per-
spective of the classifier. For effective characterization, we
first introduce the concept of classification margin [43]. As
depicted in Fig. 3, the classification margin represents the
infimum of the distance from an arbitrary feature vector, f,
to the classification boundary, which is related to the sensing
quality and the learnt classifier. According to the definition
of classification margin, a sufficient condition that the actual
received feature ˆf remains to be correctly classified is
∥f −ˆf∥2 ≤δ(PS, ℓ),
(11)
where δ(PS, ℓ) denotes the classification margin under sensing
power PS and splitting point ℓ. Then, we are ready to derive an
lower bound of the classification accuracy Rp in the following
lemma.
Class 1
Classification boundary 
of classifier 1
Classification margin 𝛿
Class 2
Centroid
Classification boundary 
of classifier 2
Discriminant gain
Feature vector 𝐟
Fig. 3. Geometry of classification margin under a classification problem.
Lemma 1: The classification accuracy is lower bounded by
Rp ≥R0(PS)
 
1 −E

∥e1∥2
+ E

∥e2∥2
δ2(PS, ℓ)
!
,
(12)
where R0(PS) denotes the ideal classification accuracy with
sensing power PS, the expectation of ∥e1∥2 is taken over
random input data samples, and the expectation of ∥e2∥2 is
performed over the stochastic quantization error.
Proof: According to the sufficient condition in (11), we
have
Rp ≥R0(PS) Pr
n
∥f −ˆf∥≤δ(PS, ℓ)
o
(a)
≥R0(PS)
 
1 −E

∥e1 + e2∥2
δ2(PS, ℓ)
!
(b)= R0(PS)
 
1 −E

∥e1∥2
+ E

∥e2∥2
δ2(PS, ℓ)
!
,
(13)
where the inequality in (a) comes from the Markov’s inequal-
ity, and (b) is due to the independence between e1 and e2 and
the fact that E[e2] = 0 [41]. This completes the proof.
□
Remark 1: Eq. (12) reveals the fundamental mechanism by
which the communication, computation, and sensing processes
affect the classification accuracy. Imperfections in computation
and communication can be represented as additive noise,
primarily impacting the accuracy of features extracted from
data samples. In contrast, sensing quality determines the
achievable classification accuracy and the robustness against
additional errors. Therefore, the core of the joint resource
allocation problem in (10) is to coordinate the sensing quality,
computational error e1, and communication quantization error
e2 under strict delay constraints to achieve desired accuracy.
To proceeding, we need to further characterize the following
terms, i.e., R0(PS), δ(PS, ℓ), E

∥e1∥2
and E

∥e2∥2
in
Lemma 1. The details of these terms are elaborated in the
sequel.
1) R0(PS): Considering the lack of solid theory on the
relationship between sensing quality and classification accu-
racy, existing works mostly resort to qualitative analysis [28],
[29]. In this paper, we therefore conduct qualitative analysis
on R0(PS) and determine the functional relationship through
simulation testing.
7
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Classification accuracy
Fig. 4. Classification accuracy versus PS.
In specific, higher sensing power allows key task-related
features to be more accurately represented in the data x,
thus improving inference accuracy. Conversely, under limited
sensing power, the required echo signal becomes overwhelmed
by noise, making it difficult for AI models to extract effective
features for inference. Therefore, there is a positive correlation
between the sensing power and classification accuracy. To
further characterize this implicit relationship, we used an em-
pirical function as an alternative. Fig. 4 depicts the relationship
between the actual classification accuracy and the sensing
power, PS. It is observed that the actual classification accuracy
is well approximated by R0(PS) = a · arctan (bPS), where
a > 0 and b > 0 are parameters to be fitted.
2) δ(PS, ℓ): We rely on the lower bound in [44, Eq. (36)],
i.e.,
δ(PS, ℓ) ≥minx{s(x)}
Q
i∈C ∥Wi∥F
≜
s
w(ℓ),
(14)
where s(x) represents the score of a data sample x, C ≜
{ℓ+ 1, · · · , L}, and Wi is the weight matrix associated with
the i-th layer. For data sample with label y, s(x) is defined by
s(x) ≜min
j̸=y
√
2(δy −δj)T f(x),
(15)
where f : RM →RN denotes the trained neural network and
δj is the Kronecker delta vector with [δj]j = 1. The numerator
in (14) represents the minimum score of the obtained data
samples, which is lower bounded by a constant, denoted by
s. Although the minimum score of the obtained data samples
is closely related to the value of PS, for simplicity, we have
adopted a universal lower bound as a substitute.
3) Expected squared norm of e1: Given the unknown distri-
bution characteristics, we cannot directly calculate E

∥e1∥2
.
Hence, we resort to find its upper bound in the following
lemma as an alternative.
Lemma 2: The square norm of error vector e1 is upper
bounded by
∥e1∥2 ≤
ℓ
X
l=1


Wl−ˆ
Wl

2
F
ℓ
Y
l′=1,l′̸=l
∥Wl′∥2
F

,
(16)
where ˆ
Wl denotes the pruned version of Wl.
Proof: Please refer to Appendix A.
□
By exploiting Lemma 2, we can straightforwardly derive
a strict upper bound on E

∥e1∥2
under a given pruning
strategy. Note that this bound is a constant given the weights
in the DNN, and it corresponding to the magnitude ∥e1∥2 in
the worst-case scenario. However, the functional relationship
between the pruning ratio ρ and ∥e1∥2 is still perplexing
and lacks a direct and concise form. This makes subsequent
analysis and optimization challenging. To tackle this, we adopt
a typical model pruning method as a representative, i.e.,
weight magnitude based pruning. In concrete, all parameters
are sorted by their absolute value, and the parameters with the
smallest 1−ρ fraction are set to 0. Given the specific pruning
strategy, we derive a proper approximation in the following
proposition.
Proposition 1: Under the weight magnitude based pruning,
the upper bound in (16) can be approximated by a function of
the pruning ratio, ρ, i.e.,
∥e1∥2 ≲C(ℓ)
 2 −ρ −ρ(log ρ −1)2
|
{z
}
≜u(ρ)
,
(17)
where C(ℓ) is defined by
C(ℓ) ≜
ℓ
X
l=1

Ml
λ2
l
ℓ
Y
l′̸=l
∥Wl′∥2
F

,
(18)
Ml is the number of parameters in Wl, and λl is a constant
introduced in Appendix B.
Proof: Please refer to Appendix B.
□
4) Expected squared norm of e2: According to [41], with
the stochastic quantization method, the expected squared norm
of e2 is bounded by
E

∥e2∥2
≤
∆(ℓ)
(2Q−1 −1)2 ≜∆(ℓ)v(Q),
(19)
where ∆(ℓ) is
∆(ℓ)≜

1
4Nℓ+1(fmax−fmin)2
if (ℓ+ 1)-th layer is MP,
1
4Nℓ(fmax−fmin)2
otherwise.
(20)
It is important to note that if the layer following the splitting
point is a maxpooling layer, the effective feature dimension
impacting classification performance reduces. Consequently,
∆(ℓ) depends on this actual feature dimension. In addition,
due to the normalization operation in DNNs, the output
features of each layer exhibit similar statistical characteristics.
Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that (fmax −fmin)2
remains consistent across different layers, allowing us to
establish a universal upper bound through, e.g., simulation
tests.
Now, based on the obtained expressions in (12), (14), (16),
and (19), we are ready to establish a strict lower bound, as
well as an explicit and more tractable approximation, for the
classification accuracy to optimize.
8
Enumerate ℓ
Enumerate 𝑄
Optimize 𝜌, 𝑃S
Optimize 𝑃C, 𝜈e
Inner iteration
Converge?
Y
N
Output solution
Fig. 5. Logical diagram of the proposed algorithm for solving problem (22).
IV. RESOURCE ALLOCATION OPTIMIZATION FOR ISCC
In this section, we propose an iterative algorithm with
low complexity to solve the energy minimization problem,
which is highly nonconvex. To begin with, building upon the
derived expressions in Section III, we explicitly rewrite the
classification accuracy constraint as
C1: R0(PS)

1−w(ℓ)
s
(C(ℓ)u(ρ)+∆(ℓ)v(Q))

≥Rt. (21)
Then, the original problem in (10) is reformulated as
minimize
ℓ,ρ,PS,PC,νe,Q Esen + Ecomp + Ecomm
subject to C1, C2 −C7.
(22)
Considering the challenge of tackling with the discrete con-
straints of splitting point, ℓ, and the number of quantization
bits, Q, we separate them from the optimization of other
variables. For ℓ, it represents the feasible split points in the
DNN model. The depth of DNN models is typically limited,
and not every layer is a feasible cut layer, so the optimization
of ℓonly requires traversing a finite set L. Similarly, for Q,
we can set an upper limit Qmax. When Q ≥Qmax, it is
safe to assume asymptotically error-free without quantization.
Consequently, we only need to perform a finite search over the
set {1, 2, · · · , Qmax} to determine the optimal Q. Therefore,
a simple exhaustive search strategy suffices as an optimization
approach for discrete variables ℓand Q, which does not
introduce a significant increase in complexity1. This process is
independent of the optimization of other variables and serves
as the outer enumeration loop.
For the remaining coupled continuous variables, i.e.,
(ρ, PS, PC, νe), we optimize them using the alternating iter-
ation method, which forms the inner iteration process shown
in Fig. 5. Given that the variables (ρ, PS) are coupled in the
classification accuracy constraint, C1, in (21), we provide a
joint optimization for (ρ, PS) in Sec. IV-A. Moreover, (PC, νe)
are irrelevant to the constraint of classification accuracy and
hence their optimizations are naturally separated in Sec. IV-B.
These two subproblems are alternately optimized to achieve a
suboptimal solution for variables (ρ, PS, PC, νe). The detailed
algorithmic process is illustrated in Fig. 5.
1For larger DNN models, more advanced enumeration methods, such as the
branch-and-bound technique [45], must be explored to reduce computational
complexity.
A. Optimization over (ρ, PS)
Given (ℓ, Q) and (PC, νe), the problem in (22) reduces to
minimize
ρ,PS
PSTsen + κν2
e
ℓ
X
l=1
λ(l, ρ)
subject to C2 :
Pℓ
l=1 λ(l, ρ)
νe
≤T1,
C1, C4, C5,
(23)
where T1 ≜Tmax −Tsen −Tcomp,s −Tcomm. Now, we are able
to get the optimal PS in the following lemma.
Lemma 3: If problem (23) is feasible, the optimal solution,
denoted by P ∗
S , is
P ∗
S = r(u(ρ))
(24)
where
r(·)
represents
the
inverse
function
of
s
w(ℓ)C(ℓ)

1 −
Rt
R0(PS)

−∆(ℓ)v(Q)
C(ℓ)
with respect to PS.
Proof: Since the classification accuracy monotonically im-
proves with growing PS, the constraint C1 can be reformulated
as PS ≥r(u(ρ)). Moreover, the objective function linearly
increases with PS. Hence, the objective is minimized with the
minimum feasible sensing power. The proof completes.
□
Substituting P ∗
S in (24) into problem (23) and simplifying
constraint C2, we have the problem equivalent to:
minimize
ρ
Tsenr(u(ρ)) + κν2
e
ℓ
X
l=1
λ(l, ρ)
subject to 0 < ρ ≤ρmax,
(25)
where ρmax is the unique solution to equation
Pℓ
l=1 λ(l,ρ)
νe
=
T1. Due to the implicit form of function r(·), the problem
in (25) can not be directly solved via traditional gradient-
based methods. To this end, we make the following assumption
according to the sensing quality analysis in [36], which is
further validated via the empirical analysis in Fig. 4.
Assumption: The derivative of r(·) is monotonically non-
decreasing.
As PS increases, the quality of the generated spectrograms
gradually saturates, leading to a diminishing improvement
in the classification accuracy. This observation confirms the
validity of this assumption. Now, we derive the following
property of the objective function in problem (25).
Theorem 1: The objective function in problem (25) is a
unimodal function.
Proof: By taking the derivative of the objective function
and combining the Assumption, it is straightforward to verify
that it is monotonically increasing. Therefore, the derivative of
the objective in (25) has at most one zero point in the feasible
domain, which completes the proof.
□
Then, we adopt the golden section optimization method for
solving (25) due to its gradient-free characteristic. Also, for
unimodal functions, it is well-known that the golden section
search method always converges to the global optimal solution
[46]. Hence, by applying the golden section search method,
9
Algorithm 1 Optimal solution to problem (23)
Input: (ℓ, Q, PC, νe), Tsen, T1, Rt, {Wl}L
l=1, κ, s, fmax, fmin,
and R0(·)
Ouput: (ρ∗, P ∗
S )
1: Initialize lb = ρmin, ub = 1, ϖ = −1+
√
5
2
and conver-
gence accuracy ϵ.
2: Update τ1 = lb+(1−ϖ)(ub−lb) and τ2 = lb+ϖ(ub−lb).
3: while |τ1 −τ2| > ϵ do
4:
if h(τ1) < h(τ2) then
5:
Update ub = τ2.
6:
else
7:
Update lb = τ1.
8:
end if
9:
Update τ1 = lb + (1 −ϖ)ub and τ2 = ub + (1 −ϖ)lb.
10: end while
11: Obtain ρ∗= (lb+ub)/2 and update P ∗
S according to (24).
12: return (ρ∗, P ∗
S )
we can obtain the optimal ρ to problem (25). Detailed steps
are summarized in Algorithm 1, where h(·) ≜Tsenr(u(·)) +
κν2
e
Pℓ
l=1 λ(l, ·).
B. Optimization over (PC, νe)
Given (ℓ, Q) and (ρ, PS), we formulate the optimization
with respect to (PC, νe) as
minimize
PC,νe
A1PC
log2

1 + gPC
BN0
 + κA2ν2
e
subject to
A1
log2

1 + gPC
BN0
 + A2
νe
≤T2,
C5, C6,
(26)
where A1
≜
NℓQ/B, A2
≜
Pℓ
l=1 λ(l, ρ), and T2
≜
Tmax −Tcomp,s −Tsen are constants. Despite the nonconvexity
of problem (26), we are fortunately able to derive the optimal
solution in closed form in the following lemma.
Lemma 4: The optimal solution (P ∗
C, ν∗
e ) of the problem in
(26) satisfies
P ∗
C = BN0
g

2
1
t∗−1

,
ν∗
e = min

νmax,
µ1
2κ
1/3
,
(27)
where t∗is equal to
t∗= max



ln2
W

A1
e

µ1 −BN0
g

+ 1
, tmin


,
(28)
µ1 is the solution to
A1t∗+ A2
ν∗e
= T2,
(29)
tmin is a constant defined in Appendix C, and W(·) is the
Lambert-W function. The exact value of µ1 is obtained via a
bisection search.
Proof: Please refer to Appendix C.
□
Algorithm 2 Proposed iterative algorithm for solving (22)
Input: Tsen, Tmax, Rt, {Wl}L
l=1, B, g, N0, κ, νs, s, fmax,
fmin, and R0(·)
Ouput: (ℓ, ρ, PS, PC, νe, Q)
1: for ℓ∈L do
2:
for Q = 1 : Qmax do
3:
Initialize iteration number i = 0 and a sufficiently
large P (0)
C
and ν(0)
e
to avoid infeasibility.
4:
repeat
5:
Update

ρ(i+1), P (i+1)
S

by solving problem (23).
6:
Update (P (i+1)
C
, ν(i+1)
e
) according to Lemma 4.
7:
Set i = i + 1.
8:
until objective value in (22) converges.
9:
end for
10: end for
11: return
the solution (ℓ, ρ, PS, PC, νe, Q) with the mini-
mum energy consumption.
TABLE II
SIMULATION PARAMETERS
Notation
Interpretation
Value
Rt
Target classification accuracy
0.85
Tmax
Maximum permitted latency
0.8 s
νmax
Maximum CPU frequency of edge device
8e6 FLOP/s
νs
CPU frequency of the server
1e11 FLOP/s
κ
The effective switched capacitance
1e-21
T0
Chirp duration
10 µs
fs
Sampling rate
10 MHz
Tsen
Unit sensing time
0.5 s
Pmax
Maximum transmit power of edge device
1 W
B
Available bandwidth for communication
0.1 MHz
g
BN0
SNR for communication
20 dB
C. Complexity and Convergence Analysis
In summary, we conclude the main steps of solving problem
(22) in Algorithm 2. We first analyze its computational com-
plexity. For the first subproblem in (23), the major complexity
lies in the golden section search method, those complexity
equals O (log2(1/ϵ)). Besides, for the second subproblem in
(26), the complexity depends on the bisection method with
complexity O (log2(1/ϵ)). Thus, the total complexity of Al-
gorithm 2 is O (|L|QmaxIitr log2(1/ϵ)), where Iitr denotes the
required number of iterations for the alternative optimization.
As for the convergence, we note that the optimal solutions
to the problems in (23) and (26) are attainable by the proposed
algorithms, which yield to nonincreasing energy consumption
in each step. Moreover, the total energy consumption is always
lower bounded by a finite value, e.g., zero. Hence, we conclude
that the proposed algorithm for optimizing (ρ, PS, PC, νe)
always converges to a local optimum.
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section, numerical simulations are presented to vali-
date the analytical results and the proposed resource allocation
scheme. We consider a typical human motion recognition task
via ISCC at the edge device. Specifically, this task aims at
10
𝐱
Conv layer
BN layer
ReLU layer
MP layer
Flatten layer
FC layer
Softmax
Result
Fig. 6. Details of the adopted network.
distinguishing five human motions, i.e., standing, adult pacing,
adult walking, child pacing, and child walking. We exploit the
typical wireless sensing simulator in [47] to generate datasets
for the DNN pre-training and data samples for edge inference.
The differences in the five human motions primarily lie in
height and movement speed. In particular, the heights of adults
and children are uniformly distributed in the ranges [1.6m,
1.9m] and [0.9m, 1.2m], respectively. Additionally, the speeds
for standing, walking, and pacing are set at 0 m/s, 0.5H m/s,
and 0.25H m/s, respectively, where H denotes the height. The
heading of the moving human is uniformly distributed in the
range [−π, π].
The adopted AI model for inference task is a DNN with two
5×5 convolution layers, three fully-connected layer with 120,
60, and 5 units, respectively, and a softmax output layer. Max
pooling operation is conducted following each convolutional
layer and the activation function is ReLU. The details of
the adopted DNN is shown in Fig. 6. The model is trained
based on a training dataset with 12,000 data samples with no
noise corruption and a testing dataset with 3,000 data samples.
Unless otherwise specified, the other parameters are listed in
Table II.
For comparison, we consider the following baselines regard-
ing the ISCC design and the corresponding resource allocation
method.
• On-server inference: The edge device upload all raw
sensory data to the server and the inference task is fully
accomplished at the server.
• Advanced on-device inference: The inference task is fully
computed at the edge device and no communication
procedure is involved. Also, model pruning strategy is
conducted to improve energy efficiency.
• w/o pruning: Except for the no feature extractor pruning,
everything else is consistent with the proposed method.
• Typical ISCC framework [28], [29]: Principal component
analysis (PCA) is adopted at the edge device for feature
extraction and fixed classifier is deployed at the server.
• Joint Communication and Computation (JC&C) design
[35], [48]: This scheme focuses solely on the joint opti-
mization of communication and computation processes,
including model splitting, model pruning, and adaptive
feature quantization. The sensing process is not consid-
ered and is treated as a fixed input.
Among them, the first and second baselines serve as ablation
experiments for the splitting selection in the proposed method,
while the third baseline is an ablation experiment for model
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Weight
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
CDF
Conv 1
Approx. Conv 1
Conv 2
Approx. Conv 2
FC 1
Approx. FC 1
FC 2
Approx. FC 2
Fig. 7. Laplacian approximation for pre-trained model parameters.
0
0.5
1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Classification accuracy
Monte-carlo result
Lower bound from (37)
Approximation in (17)
(a)
2
3
4
5
6
0.79
0.8
0.81
0.82
0.83
0.84
0.85
0.86
Classification accuracy
Monte-carlo result
Lower bound in (19)
(b)
Fig. 8. Classification accuracy versus (a) the pruning ratio, ρ, and (b) the
number of quantization bits, Q.
pruning. Additionally, by comparing with the typical ISCC
framework, we aim to highlight the significance of optimiza-
tion design for computational processes, such as adaptive
model splitting and pruning. Meanwhile, compared to existing
frameworks that focus solely on computation and communi-
cation, the importance of sensing design is emphasized.
A. Classification Accuracy Approximation Performance
We validate the approximations in Proposition 1 in Fig. 7
and Fig. 8. Initially, we present the cumulative distribution
function (CDF) of the model parameters across various layers.
It is observed that the Laplace distribution employed in this
study effectively approximates the parameter distribution in
different layers of the pre-trained DNN, particularly in layers
with a significant number of parameters, such as the second
Conv layer and the first FC layer. This precise approximation
of the weight distribution establishes a solid foundation for
that subsequent theoretical analyses. Then, we verify the
analysis regarding the pruning ratio, ρ. It is noteworthy that
the lower bound we provide can effectively characterize the
impact mechanism of various optimization variables on the
classification accuracy and discern their trends. However,
excessive scaling may lead to the final lower bound being
much lower than the actual classification accuracy. To address
11
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
Target latency (s)
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
Energy consumption (J)
Proposed method
Advanced on-device inference
On-server inference
w/o prunning
Typical ISCC framework
JC&C design
Fig. 9. Energy consumption versus the target latency, Tmax.
this, we introduce a compensation constant for scaling the
classification margin and it is determined numerically. As de-
picted in Fig. 8(a), the derived approximation with scaling also
aligns well with the actual curve obtained from Monte Carlo
verification. It is evident that the parameters of the pre-trained
DNN exhibit a degree of redundancy, allowing for pruning up
to 50% without significant performance loss in classification.
This observation supports the pruning of DNNs to strike a
balance between computational complexity and classification
accuracy. Finally, we validate the analysis of the impact of
quantization bits, Q, on classification in Fig. 8(b). It can be
observed that the performance loss caused by quantization
errors is negligible, especially compared to that by model
pruning. Therefore, we are suggested to perform low-precision
quantization on the extracted features to greatly reduce the
communication overhead with marginal performance loss,
thereby facilitating the energy-efficient ISCC design.
B. Energy Consumption Performance
Fig. 9 depicts the total energy consumption versus the
maximum tolerant latency, Tmax. It is observed that the
proposed resource allocation method achieves the least energy
consumption under diverse latency requirements. When faced
with extremely low latency requirements, such as Tmax = 0.6
s, some baseline methods fail to complete inference tasks
within the deadline. This is mainly due to the lack of adaptive
adjustments for communication and computation overheads. In
such cases, optimizing only the communication and computa-
tion processes in JC&C scheme approaches the performance
of the proposed method. This is because the proposed method
does not optimize sensing time, necessitating an improvement
in sensing quality to mitigate performance loss caused by
incomplete communication and computation. Fixing a high
sensing power is an energy-efficient choice in this case. Con-
versely, under more lenient latency constraint, executing the
inference task locally is preferred. This is attributed to latency
no longer being the primary limiting factor, thereby obviating
the necessity for the server’s powerful computing capabilities
and avoiding the additional power consumption associated
with the communication process. Notably, the JC&C method
0.8
0.82
0.84
0.86
0.88
0.9
0.92
0.94
Classification accuracy
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
Energy consumption (J)
Proposed method
Advanced on-device inference
On server inference
w/o pruning
Typical ISCC framework
JC&C design
Fig. 10. Energy consumption versus the target classification accuracy, Rt.
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
SNR (dB)
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
0.11
Energy consumption (J)
Proposed method
Advanced on-device inference
On-server inference
w/o pruning
Typical ISCC framework
JC&C design
Fig. 11. Energy consumption versus SNR.
exhibits the highest energy consumption in this scenario due
to its lack of the consideration for sensing process. The sim-
ulation results emphasize the necessity of jointly optimizing
sensing, communication, and computation for energy-efficient
inference. They further highlight the proposed scheme’s ad-
vantages in adaptively adjusting resource allocation strategies
based on task requirements
In Fig. 10, we show the comparison of energy consump-
tion with target classification accuracy Rt. It is evident that
achieving more accurate classification results in higher energy
consumption. Meanwhile, our proposed algorithm also out-
performs the other baselines. Besides, as the target accuracy
increases, it becomes apparent that performing complete infer-
ence tasks at the edge device consumes the most energy. This
is due to the fact that, compared to limited quantization errors,
model pruning has a more pronounced effect on classification
accuracy. To attain the desired classification accuracy, more
resources must be allocated to compensate for the performance
degradation caused by pruning errors. In addition, it is ob-
served that under a high accuracy target, performing inference
tasks at the server results in nearly the minimal energy
consumption. This is because low-precision quantization can
effectively reduce transmission latency without substantially
compromising classification performance. Therefore, in sce-
12
TABLE III
COMPARISON OF OPTIMAL PARAMETER SETTINGS UNDER DIFFERENT SCENARIOS.
Scenarios
Optimal parameter settings
ℓ
Q
ρ
PS (W)
PC (W)
νe (1e6 FLOP/s)
Latency-constrained
5
5
0.3425
0.0189
0.0907
7.2871
Accuracy-constrained
9
3
0.7409
0.0623
0.0169
2.6703
SNR-constrained
11
2
0.6741
0.0145
0.1527
2.5698
narios with a strict latency constraint and high classification
accuracy requirements, the optimal strategy typically involves
allocating resources for sensing and communication processes.
Fig. 11 shows the impact of SNR on energy consump-
tion, which further reflects the impact of communication
capability. The strategy of completing all computation on
the edge device does not involve communication process, so
the energy consumption in this scenario remains invariant.
Additionally, a higher SNR leads to a significant decrease in
energy consumption for the other schemes. The substantial
improvement in communication capability and efficiency due
to increased SNR prompts the optimal strategy to upload
more data to the server for further computation. This explains
the asymptotic optimal performance of server-based inference
under high SNR conditions. Additionally, it is worth noting
that the typical ISCC framework in [28], [29] can be seen
as a special case of the on-server inference method, where
additional dimensionality reduction is achieved through PCA.
Hence, we observe that this method shows certain performance
gains compared to the on-server inference approach, yet it
still maintains a similar trend of change. By comparing with
it, we further emphasize the necessity of optimizing for the
computational process in the proposed method, especially in
communication-constrained scenarios.
To further reveal the fundamental trade-offs, we show
the optimal parameter settings obtained via the proposed
resource allocation method under different scenarios in Ta-
ble III. In particular, we consider three typical scenarios,
i.e., latency-constrained (Rt, Tmax, SNR) = (0.8, 0.6, 100),
accuracy-constrained (Rt, Tmax, SNR) = (0.94, 1.2, 100), and
SNR-constrained (Rt, Tmax, SNR) = (0.8, 1.2, 1) scenarios.
To achieve low-latency requirements, extensive reduction of
redundant parameters is crucial as it significantly enhances
computational speed. In scenarios requiring high classification
accuracy, augmenting sensing capabilities and improving the
quality of data samples become paramount. This is because
the quality of sensing sets the upper limit for achievable
classification accuracy. In scenarios constrained by communi-
cation resources, maximizing computation at the edge device
is essential to achieve data uploads minimization. Moreover,
as the split point moves further along the network, the
required quantization accuracy decreases. This is because,
after multiple layers of computation, the extracted features
become increasingly distinct and robust to quantization errors,
resulting in minimal loss in inference accuracy even with lower
quantization precision.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we considered the energy-efficient ISCC
design for edge inference. A joint resource allocation problem,
including the optimization of power allocation, splitting de-
sign, pruning ratio and quantization precision, was formulated
to minimize the energy consumption at the edge device with
classification accuracy and latency requirements. The simula-
tion results verified the effectiveness of the proposed ISCC
design and confirmed its superiority over baseline approaches,
especially with stringent latency constraint. Moreover, it is
suggested that improving sensing qualities is preferred to en-
hance classification accuracy. Further, extending the proposed
approach to multi-device collaborative inference scenarios is
a promising direction for future work.
APPENDIX A
PROOF OF LEMMA 2
As a preparation, we first represent the trained feature
extractor as follows
fe(x) = Wℓσ (Wℓ−1σ (· · · W2σ (W1x)))
(30)
where σ denotes the ReLU activation. Moreover, we can also
represent the pruned feature extractor in a similar form
ˆfe(x) = ˆ
Wℓσ

ˆ
Wℓ−1σ

· · · ˆ
W2σ

ˆ
W1x

.
(31)
Now, we can reformulate the square norm of e1 in (32)
on the top of this page, where (a) is due to the triangle
inequality and the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, (b) is due to the
1-Lipschitzness of ReLU activation with respect to ℓ2 norm.
For the first term on the right hand side (RHS) of (32), by
exploiting the fact that ∥Wx∥≤∥W∥F ∥x∥, we have
Wℓ−ˆ
Wℓ

2
F ∥Wℓ−1σ (· · · W2σ (W1x))∥2
≤
Wℓ−ˆ
Wℓ

2
F
 ℓ−1
Y
l=1
∥Wl∥2
F
!
∥x∥2.
(33)
Then, following the same procedures in (32) and (33), ∥e1∥2
is bounded by (34) on the top of the next page, where (a) is
due to the fact that ∥ˆ
Wl∥2 ≤∥Wl∥2. The proof completes.
APPENDIX B
PROOF OF PROPOSITION 1
Since ρ only affects the first term of the upper bound in
(16),
Wl−ˆ
Wl

2
F , and it does not impact the second term,
we retain the second term while approximating only the first
13
∥e1∥2 = ∥fe(x) −ˆfe(x)∥2 =
Wℓσ (Wℓ−1σ (· · · W2σ (W1x))) −ˆ
Wℓσ

ˆ
Wℓ−1σ

· · · ˆ
W2σ

ˆ
W1x

2
=
Wℓσ (Wℓ−1σ (· · · W2σ (W1x))) −ˆ
Wℓσ (Wℓ−1σ (· · · W2σ (W1x)))
+ ˆ
Wℓσ (Wℓ−1σ (· · · W2σ (W1x))) −ˆ
Wℓσ

ˆ
Wℓ−1σ

· · · ˆ
W2σ

ˆ
W1x

2
(a)
≤
Wℓ−ˆ
Wℓ

2
F ∥σ (Wℓ−1σ (· · · W2σ (W1x)))∥2
+ ∥ˆ
Wℓ∥2
F
σ (Wℓ−1σ (· · · W2σ (W1x)))−σ

ˆ
Wℓ−1σ

· · · ˆ
W2σ

ˆ
W1x

2
(b)
≤
Wℓ−ˆ
Wℓ

2
F ∥Wℓ−1σ (· · · W2σ (W1x))∥2+∥ˆ
Wℓ∥2
F
Wℓ−1σ (· · · W2σ (W1x))−ˆ
Wℓ−1σ

· · · ˆ
W2σ

ˆ
W1x

2
.
(32)
∥e1∥2 (a)
≤
Wℓ−ˆ
Wℓ

2
F
 ℓ−1
Y
l=1
∥Wl∥2
F
!
∥x∥2+∥Wℓ∥2
F
Wℓ−1σ (· · · W2σ (W1x))−ˆ
Wℓ−1σ

· · · ˆ
W2σ

ˆ
W1x

2
≤
ℓ
X
l=1
Wl−ˆ
Wl

2
F

Y
l′̸=l
∥Wl∥2
F

∥x∥2
(34)
term for improved precision. By defining dl =
Wl −ˆ
Wl

2
F
and combining the adopted pruning strategy, we have
E [dl] = E


⌊(1−ρ)Ml⌋
X
k=1
w2
(k)

=
⌊(1−ρ)Ml⌋
X
k=1
E
h
x2
(k)
i
,
(35)
where the expectation is taken over the DNN weights, w(k)
represents the element with the k-th smallest absolute value
in matrix Wl and x(k) ≜|w(k)|. Before calculating the
expectations in (35), we need a probability distribution that
fits the weights in Wl. According to [39], the Laplacian
distribution with zero mean can be a good fit for pretrained
network weights. Hence, any wk in matrix Wl is assumed
Laplacian distributed with its absolute value xk
= |wk|
follows the exponential distribution with parameter λl, i.e.,
xk ∼Exp(λl). Moreover, based on the definition of x(k),
the sequence {x(k)}Ml
k=1 is an ordered version of {xk}Ml
k=1.
Building upon the theory of order statistics in [49], we rewrite
x(k) into the statistically equivalent form
x(k) = 1
λl
k
X
j=1
zj
Ml −k + 1,
(36)
where zj are independent and identically distributed standard
exponential random variable. Then, we have
E
h
x2
(k)
i
= E



1
λl
k
X
j=1
zj
Ml −k + 1


2

= 2
λ2
l
k
X
j=1
1
(Ml −j + 1)2
+ 1
λ2
l
k
X
j=1
k
X
j′̸=j
1
(Ml −j + 1)(Ml −j′ + 1). (37)
Plugging (37) into (35), we arrive at the exact value of E [dl].
However, it still exhibits a complicated form and hinders
further design. Note that E [dl] is only related to the pruning
ratio ρ. Hence, we define the following function
f(ρ)≜
⌊(1−ρ)Ml⌋
X
k=1



k
X
j=1
1
(Ml−j+1)2 +


k
X
j=1
1
Ml−j+1


2

,
(38)
and E [dl] =
1
λ2
l f(ρ). Then, our goal is to find an accurate
approximation with a concise form for f(ρ).
Defining ∆ρ ≜
1
Ml , we have
f(ρ + ∆ρ) −f(ρ) = −
⌊(1−ρ)Ml⌋
X
j=1
1
(Ml −j + 1)2
−


⌊(1−ρ)Ml⌋
X
j=1
1
Ml −j + 1


2
.
(39)
For the first term on RHS of (39), we have
⌊(1−ρ)Ml⌋
X
j=1
1
(Ml −j + 1)2 ≤
⌊(1−ρ)Ml⌋
X
j=1
1
(Ml −j + 1)(Ml −j)
=
⌊(1−ρ)Ml⌋
X
j=1
1
Ml −j −
1
Ml −j + 1
=
1
⌈ρMl⌉−1
Ml
.
(40)
As for the second term on RHS of (39), we adopt the
approximation in Eq. (0.131) of [50] and get


⌊(1−ρ)Ml⌋
X
j=1
1
Ml −j + 1


2
≈

log

Ml
ρMl + 1
2
.
(41)
14
Now, according to the above results and by definition, we can
calculate the derivative of f(ρ) with respect to ρ as
f ′(ρ) = lim
∆ρ→0
f(ρ + ∆ρ) −f(ρ)
∆ρ
=
lim
Ml→∞
f(ρ + ∆ρ) −f(ρ)
∆ρ
≈
lim
Ml→∞−
Ml
⌈ρMl⌉−Ml

log

Ml
ρMl + 1
2
+ 1
= ρ −1
ρ
−Ml log2 ρ.
(42)
Moreover, noting that f(1) = 0 and by performing indefinite
integration, we have
f(ρ) ≈−2Mlρ−Mlρ log2 ρ+2Mlρ log ρ+ρ−log ρ+2Ml−1
≈Ml
 2 −ρ −ρ(log ρ −1)2
,
(43)
where the second approximation holds when Ml ≫1. Then,
using its expectation, we can approximate dl by
dl ≈Ml
λ2

2 −ρ −ρ (log ρ −1)2
.
(44)
Due to the law of large numbers, as the number of parameters
increases, the error in this approximation gradually decreases,
leading to a more accurate approximation. Substituting (44)
into (16), we obtain (17) and complete the proof.
APPENDIX C
PROOF OF LEMMA 4
To tackle with the nonconvex objective, we introduce a new
variable t to replace PC and it follows t =
1
log2

1+
gPC
BN0
.
Furthermore, we express PC as a function with respect to t, i.e.,
PC = BN0
g

2
1
t −1

, and the problem in (26) is equivalently
reformulated as
minimize
t,νe
A1BN0
g

2
1
t −1

t + κA2ν2
e
subject to A1t + A2
νe
≤T2,
t ≥tmin, C6,
(45)
where tmin ≜
1
log2

1+ gPmax
BN0
. Now, the problem in (45)
exhibits a convex form and can be optimally solved by
checking the KKT conditions. To this end, we express the
Lagrangian function of (45) as
L(t, νe) =A1BN0
g

2
1
t −1

t+κA2ν2
e +µ1

A1t+ A2
νe
−T2

+ µ2(tmin −t) + µ3(νe −νmax),
(46)
where µ1, µ2, and µ3 are Lagrange multipliers associated with
the constraints in (45), respectively. The KKT conditions can
be listed as follows
∂L(t, νe)
∂t
= A1BN0
g
 
2
1
t −ln22
1
t
t −1
!
+ µ1A1 −µ2 =0,
(47)
∂L(t, νe)
∂νe
= 2κA2νe −µ1A2
ν2e
+ µ3 = 0,
(48)
µ1

A1t+ A2
νe
−T2

= 0,
(49)
µ2(tmin −t) = 0,
(50)
µ3(νe −νmax) = 0,
(51)
µ1, µ2, µ3 ≥0.
(52)
We start with the equality in (51). If µ2 > 0, we have t = tmin.
On the other hand, if µ2 = 0, the value of t can be determined
by equality (48), which µ1 is an unknown constant. Combining
the two cases, we arrive at the general expression in (28).
Similar to the above steps, by checking the equations in (49)
and (52), we can express the optimal ν∗
e in (27). To further
determine the value of µ1, we substitute the optimal t∗and ν∗
e
into equation (50). Since the RHS of (50) is monotonic, we
can find the unique µ1 via the bisection method. The proof
completes.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Jin, K. Yu, J. Kua, N. Zhang, Z. Pang, and Q.-L. Han, “Cloud-
fog automation: Vision, enabling technologies, and future research
directions,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1039–1054,
Feb. 2024.
[2] C. Lu et al., “Real-time wireless sensor-actuator networks for industrial
cyber-physical systems,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 104, no. 5, pp. 1013–1024,
May 2016.
[3] K. Zhang et al., “Advancements in industrial cyber-physical systems: An
overview and perspectives,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 1,
pp. 716–729, Jan. 2023.
[4] W. Xu et al., “Edge learning for B5G networks with distributed signal
processing: Semantic communication, edge computing, and wireless
sensing,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 9–
39, Jan. 2023.
[5] T. Zonta et al., “Predictive maintenance in the industry 4.0: A systematic
literature review,” Comput. & Ind. Eng., vol. 150, p. 106889, Dec. 2020.
[6] L. Lyu, J. Jin, S. Rajasegarar, X. He, and M. Palaniswami, “Fog-
empowered anomaly detection in IoT using hyperellipsoidal clustering,”
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 1174–1184, Oct. 2017.
[7] A. Bousdekis, K. Lepenioti, D. Apostolou, and G. Mentzas, “A review
of data-driven decision-making methods for industry 4.0 maintenance
applications,” Electronics, vol. 10, no. 7, p. 828, 2021.
[8] G. Zhu et al., “Pushing AI to wireless network edge: An overview on
integrated sensing, communication, and computation towards 6G,” Sci.
China Inf. Sci., vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 1–19, Feb. 2023.
[9] W. Shi, W. Xu, X. You, C. Zhao, and K. Wei, “Intelligent reflection
enabling technologies for integrated and green Internet-of-Everything
beyond 5G: Communication, sensing, and security,” IEEE Wireless
Commun., vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 147–154, Apr. 2023.
[10] G. Zhu, D. Liu, Y. Du, C. You, J. Zhang, and K. Huang, “Toward
an intelligent edge: Wireless communication meets machine learning,”
IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 19–25, Jan. 2020.
[11] W. Xu, Y. Huang, W. Wang, F. Zhu, and X. Ji, “Toward ubiquitous and
intelligent 6G networks: From architecture to technology,” Sci. China
Inf. Sci., vol. 66, no. 3, p. 130300, Feb. 2023.
[12] Z. Yang, M. Chen, W. Saad, C. S. Hong, and M. Shikh-Bahaei, “Energy
efficient federated learning over wireless communication networks,”
IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 1935–1949, Mar.
2021.
[13] J. Yao, Z. Yang, W. Xu, M. Chen, and D. Niyato, “GoMORE: Global
model reuse for resource-constrained wireless federated learning,” IEEE
Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 1543–1547, Sept. 2023.
[14] J. Yao, Z. Yang, W. Xu, D. Niyato, and X. You, “Imperfect CSI: A key
factor of uncertainty to over-the-air federated learning,” IEEE Wireless
Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 2273–2277, Dec. 2023.
[15] W. Shi, J. Yao, J. Xu, W. Xu, L. Xu, and C. Zhao, “Empowering over-
the-air personalized federated learning via RIS,” Sci. China Inf. Sci.,
2024.
[16] F. Foukalas and A. Tziouvaras, “Edge artificial intelligence for industrial
internet of things applications: An industrial edge intelligence solution,”
IEEE Ind. Electron. Mag., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 28–36, Jun. 2021.
[17] J. Shao and J. Zhang, “Communication-computation trade-off in
resource-constrained edge inference,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 58,
no. 12, pp. 20–26, Dec. 2020.
15
[18] J. Lee, H. Lee, and W. Choi, “Wireless channel adaptive DNN split
inference for resource-constrained edge devices,” IEEE Commun. Lett.,
vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 1520–1524, Jun. 2023.
[19] J. Yan, S. Bi, and Y.-J. A. Zhang, “Optimal model placement and online
model splitting for device-edge co-inference,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 8354–8367, Oct. 2022.
[20] E. Li, L. Zeng, Z. Zhou, and X. Chen, “Edge AI: On-demand acceler-
ating deep neural network inference via edge computing,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 447–457, Jan. 2020.
[21] Z. Liu, Q. Lan, and K. Huang, “Resource allocation for multiuser edge
inference with batching and early exiting,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun.,
vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 1186–1200, Apr. 2023.
[22] J. Shao, Y. Mao, and J. Zhang, “Task-oriented communication for mul-
tidevice cooperative edge inference,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 73–87, Jan. 2023.
[23] Q. Lan, Q. Zeng, P. Popovski, D. G¨und¨uz, and K. Huang, “Progressive
feature transmission for split classification at the wireless edge,” IEEE
Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 3837–3852, Jun. 2023.
[24] D. Wen, X. Li, Y. Zhou, Y. Shi, S. Wu, and C. Jiang, “Integrated sensing-
communication-computation for edge artificial intelligence,” IEEE Inter-
net Things Mag., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 14–20, Jul. 2024.
[25] F. Liu et al., “Integrated sensing and communications: Toward dual-
functional wireless networks for 6G and beyond,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun., vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 1728–1767, Jun. 2022.
[26] Z. He et al., “Full-duplex communication for ISAC: Joint beamforming
and power optimization,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 41, no. 9,
pp. 2920–2936, Sept. 2023.
[27] Y. He, G. Yu, Y. Cai, and H. Luo, “Integrated sensing, computation,
and communication: System framework and performance optimization,”
IEEE Tran. Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 1114–1128, Feb. 2024.
[28] D. Wen, P. Liu, G. Zhu, Y. Shi, J. Xu, Y. C. Eldar, and S. Cui, “Task-
oriented sensing, computation, and communication integration for multi-
device edge AI,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 3, pp.
2486–2502, Mar. 2024.
[29] D. Wen, X. Jiao, P. Liu, G. Zhu, Y. Shi, and K. Huang, “Task-oriented
over-the-air computation for multi-device edge AI,” IEEE Trans. Wire-
less Commun., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 2039–2053, Mar. 2024.
[30] Z. Zhuang, D. Wen, Y. Shi, G. Zhu, S. Wu, and D. Niyato, “Integrated
sensing-communication-computation for over-the-air edge AI inference,”
IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 3205–3220, Apr.
2024.
[31] X. Chen, K. B. Letaief, and K. Huang, “On the view-and-channel
aggregation gain in integrated sensing and edge AI,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun., vol. 42, no. 9, pp. 2292–2305, Sept. 2024.
[32] X. Jiao, D. Wen, G. Zhu, W. Jiang, W. Luo, and Y. Shi, “Task-oriented
over-the-air computation for edge-device co-inference with balanced
classification accuracy,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Techn., vol. 73, no. 11, pp.
17 818–17 823, Nov. 2024.
[33] Y. Mao, X. Yu, K. Huang, Y.-J. Angela Zhang, and J. Zhang, “Green
edge AI: A contemporary survey,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 112, no. 7, pp. 880–
911, Jul. 2024.
[34] S. Liu, D. Wen, D. Li, Q. Chen, G. Zhu, and Y. Shi, “Energy-efficient
optimal mode selection for edge AI inference via integrated sensing-
communication-computation,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 23,
no. 12, pp. 14 248–14 262, Dec. 2024.
[35] M. Krouka, A. Elgabli, C. B. Issaid, and M. Bennis, “Energy-efficient
model compression and splitting for collaborative inference over time-
varying channels,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Symp. Pers., Indoor Mobile
Radio Commun. (PIMRC), 2021, pp. 1173–1178.
[36] P. Liu, G. Zhu, S. Wang, W. Jiang, W. Luo, H. V. Poor, and S. Cui, “To-
ward ambient intelligence: Federated edge learning with task-oriented
sensing, computation, and communication integration,” IEEE J. Sel.
Topics Signal Process., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 158–172, Feb. 2023.
[37] P. Molchanov, A. Mallya, S. Tyree, I. Frosio, and J. Kautz, “Importance
estimation for neural network pruning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog. (CVPR), 2019, pp. 11 256–11 264.
[38] H. Li, A. Kadav, I. Durdanovic, H. Samet, and H. P. Graf, “Pruning
filters for efficient convnets,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.08710, 2016.
[39] B. Isik, T. Weissman, and A. No, “An information-theoretic justification
for model pruning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., 2022, pp.
3821–3846.
[40] Y. Mao, J. Zhang, and K. B. Letaief, “Dynamic computation offloading
for mobile-edge computing with energy harvesting devices,” IEEE J.
Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 34, no. 12, pp. 3590–3605, Dec. 2016.
[41] Y. Wang, Y. Xu, Q. Shi, and T.-H. Chang, “Quantized federated learning
under transmission delay and outage constraints,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 323–341, Jan. 2022.
[42] J. Yao, W. Xu, Z. Yang, X. You, M. Bennis, and H. V. Poor, “Wireless
federated learning over resource-constrained networks: Digital versus
analog transmissions,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 10,
pp. 14 020–14 036, Oct. 2024.
[43] Z. Liu, Q. Lan, A. E. Kalør, P. Popovski, and K. Huang, “Over-the-
air multi-view pooling for distributed sensing,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 7652–7667, Jul. 2024.
[44] J. Sokoli´c, R. Giryes, G. Sapiro, and M. R. D. Rodrigues, “Robust large
margin deep neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 65,
no. 16, pp. 4265–4280, Aug. 2017.
[45] D. R. Morrison, S. H. Jacobson, J. J. Sauppe, and E. C. Sewell, “Branch-
and-bound algorithms: A survey of recent advances in searching, branch-
ing, and pruning,” Discrete Optimization, vol. 19, pp. 79–102, 2016.
[46] Z. Xie, Z. Lin, and W. Chen, “Power and rate adaptive pushing over
fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 10, pp.
6436–6450, Oct. 2021.
[47] G. Li, S. Wang, J. Li, R. Wang, X. Peng, and T. X. Han, “Wireless
sensing with deep spectrogram network and primitive based autoregres-
sive hybrid channel model,” in Proc. IEEE Int Workshop Signal Process.
Adv. Wireless Commun. (SPAWC), 2021, pp. 481–485.
[48] X. Ye, Y. Sun, D. Wen, G. Pan, and S. Zhang, “End-to-end delay
minimization based on joint optimization of DNN partitioning and
resource allocation for cooperative edge inference,” in Proc. IEEE Veh.
Techn. Conf. (VTC2023-Fall), 2023, pp. 1–7.
[49] A. R´enyi, “On the theory of order statistics,” Acta Math. Acad. Sci.
Hung, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 48–89, 1953.
[50] I. S. Gradshteyn and I. M. Ryzhik, Table of Integrals, Series, and
Products.
Academic press, 2014.
