1
Federated Learning Strategies for Coordinated
Beamforming in Multicell ISAC
Lai Jiang, Student Member, IEEE, Kaitao Meng, Member, IEEE, Murat Temiz, Member, IEEE, Jiaming
Hu, Student Member, IEEE, and Christos Masouros, Fellow, IEEE,
Abstract—We propose two cooperative beamforming frame-
works based on federated learning (FL) for multi-cell integrated
sensing and communications (ISAC) systems. Our objective is to
address the following dilemma in multicell ISAC: 1) Beamforming
strategies that rely solely on local channel information risk
generating significant inter-cell interference (ICI), which de-
grades network performance for both communication users and
sensing receivers in neighboring cells; 2) conversely centralized
beamforming strategies can mitigate ICI by leveraging global
channel information, but they come with substantial transmission
overhead and latency that can be prohibitive for latency-sensitive
and source-constrained applications. To tackle these challenges,
we first propose a partially decentralized training framework mo-
tivated by the vertical federated learning (VFL) paradigm. In this
framework, the participating base stations (BSs) collaboratively
design beamforming matrices under the guidance of a central
server. The central server aggregates local information from the
BSs and provides feedback, allowing BSs to implicitly manage ICI
without accessing the global channel information. To make the
solution scalable for densely deployed wireless networks, we take
further steps to reduce communication overhead by presenting
a fully decentralized design based on the horizontal federated
learning (HFL). Specifically, we develop a novel loss function to
control the interference leakage power, enabling a more efficient
training process by entirely eliminating local channel information
exchange. Numerical results show that the proposed solutions
can achieve significant performance improvements comparable
to the benchmarks in terms of both communication and radar
information rates.
Index Terms—Integrated sensing and communication, multi-
cell ISAC, federated learning, coordinated beamforming.
I. INTRODUCTION
Integrated sensing and communications (ISAC) has emerged
as a key technology for the next-generation wireless networks
[1], [2]. As a promising solution to address the challenge of
limited wireless resources, ISAC systems unify both radar and
communication functions on a shared spectrum, waveform,
and platform, enabling more efficient and innovative use of
available resources. In addition, by simultaneously integrating
sensing and reliable communication service, ISAC paves the
way for advanced applications such as autonomous vehicles,
smart cities, and enhanced security systems, making it a
cornerstone technology for future networks [3]. In the cellular
domain, the ultimate goal of deploying ISAC solutions would
be to enable coordinated sensing of unprecedented scale. This
The authors are with the Department of Electronic and Electrical En-
gineering, University College London, London, UK (emails: {lai.jiang.22,
kaitao.meng, m.temiz, jiaming.hu.19, c.masouros}ucl.ac.uk).
will inevitably require network level coordination to address
interference and enable efficient use of resources [4].
With the deployment of multi-antenna arrays on the base
stations (BSs), transmit beamforming becomes a critical tech-
nique in the downlink transmission, as it can enable flexible
tradeoffs and mutual benefits between the communication
and sensing by leveraging the available spatial degrees of
freedom (DoFs) [5]. Numerous works have studied transmit
waveforms/beamforming design to enhance both S&C perfor-
mance at the link level [6]–[11], focusing on optimizing the
communication and sensing performance for users and targets
within a single cell. However, in practical multi-cell systems
where multiple BSs may share the same time and frequency
resources, users experience not only intra-cell interference
caused from unintended signals in the same cell but also
inter-cell interference (ICI) from surrounding cells, which
results in reduced received signal-to-interference-plus-noise
ratio (SINR). In fact, ICI has been proven detrimental to both
network-level S&C performance in dense deployed cellular
networks [12], with sensing being particularly sensitive due to
the round-trip path loss of echo signals. Consequently, per-cell
beamforming strategies that overlook the effect of ICI can not
be directly applied in practical multi-cell ISAC systems.
A potential solution for ICI management in cellular systems
is to either enable distributed coordinated beamforming by
exchanging local information between multiple BSs or to
gather global information for designing the optimal transmit
waveform or beamforming matrices in a centralized manner
[13]. Specifically, the authors in [4] proposed a framework
where BSs cooperatively serve the users and localize each
target for enhancing the ICI management and S&C per-
formance. Moreover, in [14], a coordinated beamforming
(CBF) framework is developed to optimize target parameter
estimation and communication performance while managing
the ICI power, where precoders are centrally designed and
subsequently allocated to individual BSs for local execution.
Nevertheless, the strategies that rely on information exchange
inevitably incur excessive transmission overhead and latency,
particularly in the large-scale densely deployed networks.
Therefore, it is crucial to develop decentralized beamforming
strategies that can effectively manage ICI while minimizing
the need for frequent information exchange.
In addition to minimizing communication overhead, com-
putational complexity is a significant concern in the realm of
beamforming design [15]. In the literature, the majority of
0000–0000/00$00.00 © 2021 IEEE
arXiv:2501.16951v1  [eess.SP]  28 Jan 2025
2
existing beamforming methods, whether for communication-
only systems or ISAC systems [6]–[11], [16] are developed
based on optimization techniques. For instance, the authors
in [6], [10] formulated the optimization problem with the
objective of maximizing the radar sensing performance while
guaranteeing the SINR for each communication user exceeds
a predefined threshold, and the optimal beamforming matrices
can then be obtained by solving the problem using semidefinite
relaxation (SDR) technique. In [17], the authors extended the
WMMSE [16] framework to ISAC systems to address the
proposed problem of maximizing the weighted S&C sum rate.
However, optimization-based algorithms often rely heavily on
iterative procedures and complex matrix operations, which
introduce substantial computational complexity and latency
[18]. This makes the implementation of these algorithms in
real-world systems challenging, particularly in time-sensitive
scenarios or those with limited processing resources.
Building on the above discussion, deep learning techniques
provide an efficient alternative to tackle the optimization prob-
lems through a data-driven strategy [19]–[23]. The deep neural
networks (DNNs) exhibit a remarkable capacity for automat-
ically extracting features from large amounts of raw data and
gradually abstracting high-level representations through multi-
ple layers of interconnected nodes or computational units [24].
In contrast to methods based on rigorous mathematical mod-
els, an offline-trained DNN can efficiently handle large-scale
matrix multiplications and additions, with the exploitation of
its parallel computation capabilities. Up to now, extensive
studies have investigated the application of DNN to find the
optimal beamformer/precoder using channel state information
(CSI) for both conventional communication-only systems and
ISAC systems. For example, the authors in [20] proposed a
DNN-based framework for downlink beamforming, training
the network to minimize the mean square error (MSE) between
the output and the desired beamforming matrix. Furthermore,
to avoid excessive computation required in supervised learning
methods, the authors in [21] introduced an unsupervised
approach, training the DNN to directly maximize the sum
rate under transmit power constraints, which can achieve
the performance comparable to WMMSE algorithm [16]. In
[25], an neural network was developed for ISAC precoders
design, aiming to maximize target illumination power while
maintaining the quality of service (QoS) for communication
users. Despite achieving low computational complexity, the
aforementioned references often fall short in effectively man-
aging ICI. This is primarily due to their reliance on per-cell
beamforming strategies, which overlook the effects of ICI from
adjacent cells.
The above discussion motivates us to adopt the federated
learning (FL) paradigm for beamforming design in multi-
cell ISAC systems, as it provides a framework that integrates
distributed local information while minimizing the overhead
associated with information exchange. As a paradigm of dis-
tributed learning framework, FL enables multiple local clients
to collaboratively train a DNN model under coordination of
a central server [26]. Unlike centralized learning schemes,
during the training process in FL, each client only transmits
the gradients or model parameters, rather than the entire
dataset. This significantly reduces the transmission overhead,
while at the same time preserving privacy. Thus, the jointly
trained model leverages the datasets spread across numerous
local nodes without explicitly exchanging them, which aligns
well with the needs for transmission/computation efficiency
in practical multi-cell systems [27]. To leverage the decen-
tralized nature of FL, recent research efforts are applying FL
framework for the physical layer design in massive MIMO
systems [28]–[31]. Specifically, the authors in [28] applied
the FL framework for hybrid beamforming design using the
gradients data collected from distributed edge users, which
achieved the performance comparable to that of the centralized
learning scheme [32]. Subsequently in [33], the authors first
investigated a decentralized precoding framework for cell-
free systems based on horizontal federated learning (HFL).
The results showed that integrating different channel datasets
with the same feature space can enhance the model per-
formance. Subsequently, they proposed a vertical federated
learning (VFL)-based approach to integrate the feature-level
information at local devices, which eliminates the communi-
cation cost associated with exchanging local CSI during the
online precoding stage. Notably, to the best of our knowledge,
there are limited research focused on developing FL-based
beamforming schemes for multi-cell ISAC systems.
In this work, our primary objective is to develop an effi-
cient decentralized beamforming method tailored for multi-
cell ISAC systems. By leveraging the distributed nature of
FL, we propose two coordinated beamforming frameworks
that utilize channel data collected from distributed BSs to
jointly train a DNN. The first VFL-based solution successfully
eliminates the need to exchange local channel information
during online deployment, enabling the participating BSs to
achieve cooperative beamforming design. To enhance scala-
bility and adaptability for practical deployment, we propose a
second solution that integrates the concept of HFL with a novel
loss function for controlling leakage power. This approach
achieves global interference control using only local channel
information, enabling fully distributed beamforming during
both training and online deployment. The main contributions
of this paper are summarized as follows:
• We propose a partially decentralized beamforming frame-
work based on VFL. During the offline training phase,
multiple dual-functional BSs use their local datasets to
train the individual DNN models, guided by the global
loss function that is computed by a central server. The
trained models then design the optimal beamforming ma-
trices with low computational overhead when deployed
online.
• We propose a fully decentralized beamforming frame-
work based on HFL. In this framework, we propose
a novel loss function to enable a fully decentralized
implementation, which aims at maximizing the weighted
sum of communication rate and radar information rate
while mitigating interference leakage to undesired re-
3
Fig. 1. The considered multi-cell ISAC system.
ceivers. Therefore, the loss function can be independently
optimized at each BS, which eliminates the need for
exchanging channel information during both training and
online beamforming stages. This characteristic enhances
data privacy and significantly reduces communication
overhead, making the approach more adaptable and ef-
ficient for multi-cell systems.
• Through numerical simulations, we validate the effective-
ness of our proposed approaches in eliminating ICI by
comparing them with traditional per-cell beamforming
strategies. The results highlight the performance im-
provements achieved by effectively controlling ICI in
multi-cell systems. Moreover, our solutions can achieve
performance comparable to those of centralized methods,
and strike a good tradeoff between communications and
sensing performance. Finally, we apply the model pruning
technique to further reduce the computational complexity
of proposed methods, offering substantial improvements
in efficiency and feasibility for practical deployments.
Notations: We use the following mathematical notations
throughout this paper. Boldface upper-case letters denote the
matrices, boldface lower-case letters denote the vectors, and
normal font denotes the scalars. (·)T , (·)H, ℜ(·), ℑ(·) are
transpose, conjugate transpose, the real part and the imaginary
part of a matrix/vector respectively. tr(·) is the trace of a matrix
and ∥·∥refers to the Euclidean norm. The complex space and
real space are represented by C and R. IK is the identity
matrix of rank K.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
As shown in Fig. 1, the proposed framework is carried out
by M BSs and a central server. The dual-functional BS m,
m = 1, 2, .., M is equipped with a half-wavelength spaced
uniform linear array (ULA) of NT transmit antennas and NR
receive antennas, serving Km downlink single-antenna users
while sensing a target simultaneously. During the training
stage, the model parameters are exchanged via the backhual
links between the participating BSs and the server. The index
sets of the communication users and BSs are denoted by
Km
△= [1, 2, ..., Km] and M
△= [1, 2, ..., M], respectively.
A. Communication model
In the downlink, a unit-power data stream Sm ∈CKm×L
with L being the number of timeslots in a frame is transmitted
by the mth BS to the Km communication users (CUs) which
are uniformly distributed within the coverage area of each
cell. Without loss of generality, we assume Km
=
K,
m = 1, 2, ..., M for consistency. The baseband transmitted
symbol matrix Xm ∈CNT ×L at the mth BS is denoted by
Xm = WmSm =
K
X
k=1
wm,ksm,k,
(1)
where Wm
= [wm,1, wm,2, ...wm,K] ∈CNT ×K is the
beamforming matrix to be designed, and sH
m,k ∈CL×1 denotes
the data stream intended for the kth user in the mth cell. We
assume the data streams are orthogonal when L is sufficiently
large so that: (1/L)SmSH
m = IK. In this case, the received
signal at the kth user in the mth cell is the summation of the
intended signal and both intra-cell and inter-cell interference,
given by
yc
m,k = hH
m,m,kwm,ksm,k
|
{z
}
intended signal
+
K
X
l̸=k
hH
m,m,kwm,lsm,l
|
{z
}
intra−cell interference
+
M
X
n̸=m
K
X
i=1
hH
n,m,kwn,isn,i
|
{z
}
inter−cell interference
+zm,k,
(2)
where hm,n,k ∈CNT ×1 denotes the block fading channel
vector from the mth BS to the kth user in the nth cell, and
zm,k is the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) vector, i.e.,
each element is independent and identically distributed and
follows the Gaussian distribution with zero mean and variance
σ2
c. The received SINR of user k is
γc
m,k =
|hH
m,m,kwm,k|2
PK
l̸=k |hH
m,m,kwm,l|2 + PM
n̸=m
PK
i=1 |hH
n,m,kwn,i|2 + σ2c
.
(3)
The first two terms in the denominator of (3) represent
the power of intra-cell interference and inter-cell interference,
respectively, which are to be minimized to improve the system-
level performance. Then, the achievable sum communication
rate of the multicell ISAC is written as
Rc =
M
X
m=1
K
X
k=1
log2(1 + γc
m,k).
(4)
B. Sensing model
As commonly adopted in the literature [9], [14], [34], we
consider a point target located in the far field of each cell
and sensed by its nearest BS. For multi-target scenarios, the
BS serves a single target at a given moment to maximize the
utilization of its transmission power and avoid sensing intra-
cell interference between the targets. As the BS works as a
mono-static radar mode, the angle of departure (AoD) and
angle of arrival (AoA) are the same. Following the network-
level sensing interference model in [12], it is the ICI channels
from neighboring BSs to the serving BS that impact the
4
reception of the target echoes and therefore dominate the
network’s sensing performance. The received signal at the mth
serving BS is the summation of the echo signal reflected by
the target and ICI from the surrounding BSs, given by
ys
m = αmb(θm)aH(θm)Wmsm(t −2τm)
|
{z
}
target echo signal
+
M
X
n̸=m
Gn,mWnsn(t −τn,m)
|
{z
}
inter−cell inteference
+ Gm,mWmsm(t)
|
{z
}
self−interference
+zm,
(5)
where Gn,m ∈CNR×NT represents the interference chan-
nel from the nth BS to the mth BS, and Gm,m
is
the self-interference channel from the transmit antennas to
the receive antennas of BS m. In (5), αm models the
round-trip pathloss and the radar cross section (RCS) of
the target, τ is the delay experienced by the signal. The
transmit and receive steering vectors are represented by
a(θm) = [1, ..., ejπ(NT −1) sin(θm)]T ∈CNT ×1 and b(θm) =
[1, ..., ejπ(NR−1) sin(θm)]T
∈CNR×1 respectively, and θm
denotes the angle of the target in the mth cell with respect to its
serving BS, which is assumed to be estimated from a previous
crude observation. To maximize the received SINR and ensure
computational efficiency, the mth BS applies the maximum-
ratio combining (MRC) beamformer vH
m = bH(θm) ∈C1×NR
to process the received signal, the echo signal after processing
is given by
˜ys
m = vH
mys
m
= NRαmaH(θm)Wmsm(t −2τm)
+
M
X
n̸=m
gH
n,mWnsn(t −τn,m)
+ vH
mGm,mWmsm(t) + ˜zm,
(6)
where gH
n,m = vH
mGn,m ∈C1×NT is the equivalent interfer-
ence channel, and ˜zm is the equivalent AWGN with variance
σ2
s. As Gm,m can be obtained from previous measurements,
we assume the sensing self-interference can be canceled by BS
m as in [12]. Let gH
m,m = αmaH(θm) denote the equivalent
sensing channel from the mth BS to the intended target, the
SINR of received signal at the mth BS can be denoted by
γs
m = NR
PK
k=1 |gH
m,mwm,k|2
PM
n̸=m
PK
l=1 |gH
n,mwn,l|2 + σ2s
,
(7)
In (7), the numerator represents the illumination power for
the intended target, which is expected to be maximized for
achieving better sensing performance [35]. The achievable
sum radar information rate is used to evaluate the network-
level sensing performance. Indeed, the accuracy of parameter
estimation is proportional to the information rate [36], which
is given by
Rs =
M
X
m=1
log2(1 + γs
m).
(8)
C. Problem Description
To achieve the performance tradeoff between communi-
cations and sensing, we aim to solve the following global
optimization problem
max
[W1,..,WM]
ρRc + (1 −ρ)Rs
s.t.
tr(WmWH
m) ≤PT ,
∀m,
(9)
where ρ ∈[0, 1] is the weighting factor to select between the
communication metric and sensing metric, and PT denotes the
transmit power constraint at each BS. Apparently, to maximize
the S&C performance from the network perspective, we need
to eliminate the ICI to unintended receivers. However, finding
the optimal solution of problem (9) is challenging not only due
to its non-convexity but also because it requires the knowledge
of global channel information, e.g. the communication chan-
nels and sensing channels between all the transceivers across
the interfering cells. To address the problem mentioned above,
we propose two beamforming frameworks with different levels
of decentralization and coordination to solve the problem (9)
based on the VFL and HFL frameworks respectively in Section
III and IV.
III. VFL-BASED BEAMFORMING FRAMEWORK
In the scenario considered, the knowledge of each BS is
limited to the channels between itself and all the receivers,
i.e., the mth BS has the information of local communication
channels Hm = {hm,n,k}n∈M,k∈K and local sensing channels
Gm = {gm,n}n∈M. The global communication and sensing
channel information is defined as H = [H1, H2, ...HM] ∈
CNT ×M 2K and G = [G1, G2, ...GM] ∈CNT ×M 2, which can
be viewed as the aggregation of the local channel information.
In other words, the channel datasets collected by the BSs
share the same sample space, consisting of the the MK users
and M targets in the network, but each BS possesses distinct
local channel information related to these users/targets. This
aligns well with the application scenario of the VFL frame-
work, which is designed for situations where partial channel
information is available but full global channel information is
inaccessible. Leveraging its nature of feature aggregation, we
propose using the VFL framework to train local DNNs for the
coordinated design of optimal dual-functional beamforming
matrices.
A. Training Samples Generation
Before the training phase, we introduce a channel sample
collection stage where each BS collects its own local channel
information to prepare the training datasets. This step is to
ensure that the BSs have sufficient data for training the decen-
tralized beamforming framework. Without loss of generality,
we assume a time-division duplex (TDD) system so that CSI
can be estimated via pilot symbols. First, each BS transmits
an orthogonal pilot signal ˜X for channel estimation and initial
detection, the covariance matrix of the probing signal is given
by:
R ˜X = PT
NT
INT .
(10)
5
The omnidirectional signals are received by both intended
users and targets, as well as by interference devices. BS m can
obtain a first crude estimate of the direction θm of the target in
its cell based on the echo signal. Once received the pilots, the
users and neighboring BSs feed the estimated channel data
back to the transmitting BS. Each BS gathers the received
channel information and compiles it to form a single channel
sample. Finally, BS m obtains a collection of channel samples
Hm and Gm, and the overall local dataset is represented by
D(m) =

Hm, Gm
	
. Specifically, it is reasonable to assume
that BSs can obtain accurate channel estimation as DNNs have
strong robustness toward input data as in [22], [33].
B. DNN architecture
Multilayer perceptrons (MLP) are recognized as universal
funcion approximators [37] and widely used in approaching
complex nonlinear functions. As shown in Fig. 2, we use a
MLP network composed of the following units:
1) Input layer: For the DNN deployed at the mth BS, its
first layer takes the communication channel Hm ∈CNT ×MK
and sensing channel Gm ∈CNT ×M acquired at the local
site as the input. As complex number operations are not
supported by the current DNN software, the channel vector
is transformed to real-valued coefficients before feeding it
into the input layer through a R2C block. Specifically, the
communication channel matrix Hm is split into the real part
ℜ(Hm) and imaginary part ℑ(Hm), which are then stacked
to form the real-valued input vector ˜Hm = [ℜ(Hm), ℑ(Hm)].
Similarly, we process the sensing channel matrix Gm using
the same pipeline and get ˜Gm = [ℜ(Gm), ℑ(Gm)]. The
concatenated matrix [ ˜Hm, ˜Gm] is then flattened and fed into
the first layer of the neural network for forward propagation.
2) Hidden layers: The MLP network contains NH fully-
connected hidden layers with dH neurons in each layer. The
depth of it impacts the nonlinearity and ability to extract
feature information. Each hidden layer is followed by an
activation layer and a dropout layer. As some elements of
the beamforming matrix can be negative, the LeakyReLu [38]
function is adopted as the activation function which provides
a non-zero slope to negative values. The dropout layer with
probability factor ζ = 0.15 can help to alleviate overfitting by
randomly setting input units to zero. The process of hidden
layers can be described as:
˜
W = f([ ˜Hm, ˜Gm]; ω) = f NH−1(f NH−2(...f 1([ ˜Hm, ˜Gm])))
|
{z
}
NH layers
.
(11)
where ω is the model parameters set.
3) Output layer: The output layer is of size NT × K × 2
and followed by a normalization layer to scale the output so
that the power constraint in (9) can be satisfied, which can be
denoted by
ˆ
W =
s
PT
tr( ˜
W ˜
WH)
˜
W.
(12)
Finally, we split the output
ˆ
W ∈RNT ×K×2 in the last
dimension to obtain the real and imaginary parts, and process
Fig. 2. The proposed beamforming DNN structure.
the output with a C2R block, which recovers the complex
beamformer W∗of size NT × K by combining the real and
imaginary parts in the following way
W∗= ˆ
W[:, :, 1] + j ˆ
W[:, :, 2].
(13)
where the two terms on the right-hand side are the first and
second elements along the third dimension of ˆ
W.
C. Learning-based Formulation and Training
Due to the issue of local BSs lacking global information,
it is difficult for them to directly calculate and optimize the
local communication and sensing performance metrics for the
intended users/targets as in [6]–[11], [25]. Traditional cooper-
ative beamforming schemes [13], [14] require the collection of
global channel information to design beamformers/precoders
while managing inter-cell interference, which inevitably results
in considerable communication overhead and increased latency
during online beamforming stage. In contrast, our approach
prioritizes minimizing information exchange and reducing the
associated overhead. To achieve this, during the training phase,
it is the central server that is responsible for calculating the
global communication and sensing loss
ℓc(W) = −
M
X
m=1
K
X
k=1
log2(1 + γc
m,k),
(14)
ℓs(W) = −
M
X
m=1
log2(1 + γs
m),
(15)
where W = [W1, W2, .., WM] ∈CNT ×KM is the collection
of locally designed beamforming matrices. Since the global
loss functions (14) (15) are defined as the negative sum
communication rate and radar information rate, the global
optimization problem becomes minimizing the weighted sum
of (14) and (15)
min
[W1,..,WM]
ρℓc(W) + (1 −ρ)ℓs(W)
s.t.
tr(WmWH
m) ≤PT ,
∀m.
(16)
For the CUs, the complete feature space of the ith sample is the
global channel information H(i) = [H(i)
1 , H(i)
2 , ...H(i)
M ], with
H(i)
m being the ith partial feature available at BS m. Similarly,
G(i) = [G(i)
1 , G(i)
2 , ...G(i)
M ] denotes the ith complete feature
space of sensing, which is the collection of local sensing
channel samples. Under the VFL framework, each BS learns
to design the local beamformer W∗
m, ∀m ∈M through the
following steps.
6
Fig. 3. VFL training framework.
1) Forward propagation: In the global round T, the local
BSs use the ith local channel sample to design the beamform-
ing matrices, the process can be given by
Wm = f([H(i)
m , G(i)
m ]; ω(T )
m ),
(17)
where ω(T )
m
is the model parameter set of the mth BS at the
Tth global round.
2) Local uploading: Each BS uploads its independently
designed beamforming matrices and the corresponding input
channel sample [H(i)
m , G(i)
m ] to the central server.
3) Features aggregation:
Upon receiving the designed
beamformers and partial channel information from the BSs,
the central server can aggregate them into the global channel
information H(i), G(i) and calculate the communication loss
(14) and sensing loss (15). The global loss is then fed back to
the local BSs for model updates.
4) Backward propagation: With the global loss informa-
tion, each BS can perform individual backward propagation
using the chain rule, propagating the error from the output
layer back to the input layer of its own model. In this work,
we adopt the stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm [39]
to update the model parameters, which is given by
ω(T +1)
m
= w(T )
m −η∇ℓ
 W; ω(T )
m

,
(18)
where η represents the learning rate.
Fig. 3 shows the proposed VFL-based beamforming frame-
work for cooperative beamforming design. Notably, the pro-
posed network can be equivalently viewed as an overall multi-
branch multi-output neural network, with each local model
serving as one branch of the network and the server being
the output layer. Through the backhual links, the central
server guides the local models to control the ICI by implicitly
providing the global channel information. The framework is
summarized in Algorithm 1.
D. Complexity Analysis of VFL-based beamforming
Compared to traditional methods, in addition to the com-
putational overhead during online beamforming stage, deep
learning-based algorithms also involve the offline training
costs. In the training phase, the total computational overhead
can be generally represented as the sum of forward propa-
gation and backward propagation, which is associated with
the arithmetic operations in each fully connected layer and
the data processing blocks. Specifically, the proposed MLP
Algorithm 1 Vertical Federated learning framework
Offline Training:
Input : concatenated channel [H(i)
m , G(i)
m ]
Output : beamformer W∗
Initialize ω(0)
1 , ω(0)
2 , ..., ω(0)
M
for global round T = 1, 2, ... do
Forward Propagation: each BS designs the respective
beamforming matrix with local channel information;
Features Aggregation: the central server calculates the
weighted global loss (14) and (15) based on collected
local information;
Backward Propagation: each BS updates local param-
eters with the global loss provided by the server (18).
end for
Online Beamforming:
W∗
m = f([H(i)
m , G(i)
m ]; ω∗), ∀m ⊂M
network consists of NH hidden layers, each with a dimension
of dH, while the input and output dimensions are related
to the system configuration. Bsed on the Big-O notation,
the computational complexity due to the linear transforma-
tion in the forward propagation stage can be denoted by
O((MK + M + K)NT dH + NHd2
H). Since the activation
layers involve element-wise operations, their complexity is
given by O((NH + 1)dH). Besides, the input and output
of the neural network are processed by the R2C and C2R
blocks respectively, which results in the computational cost of
O((M + 1)KNT ). Correspondingly, the computational cost
of backward propagation is generally about twice that of
forward propagation, as it involves similar matrix operations
as in forward propagation, but with the additional gradient
computation. Based on this, the total overhead associated
with the computation during the training phase is given by
O(3((MK + M + K)NT dH + NHd2
H)).
Furthermore, unlike traditional single-node deep learning,
multi-node federated learning requires additional consideration
of communication overhead during the training phase, in
addition to the aforementioned computational costs. In a single
training iteration of the VFL framework, the participating BSs
need to upload their output matrices and the corresponding
input channel samples to the central server for calculating
the global loss after completing one forward propagation,
7
Fig. 4. HFL training framework.
which results in a total communication cost of (M + 1)KNT
for each local BS. As for the online deployment phase, the
computational overhead is primarily attributed to forward
propagation, which scales linearly with the number of cells
M, communication users K and transmit antennas NT . As
a comparison, the computational complexity of WMMSE is
in the order of O(Lω(K2N 2
T + KN 3
T )) according to [40],
where Lω denotes the number of iterations. This indicates
the inefficiency of conventional optimization algorithms for
practical use due to their complexity and reliance on multiple
iterations for convergence, which limits parallelization. In con-
trast, neural networks leverage GPUs for parallel computing,
greatly enhancing training and inference speeds.
IV. HFL-BASED BEAMFORMING FRAMEWORK
As discussed in the previous section, the proposed VFL
framework eliminates the need for local channel information
collection during online deployment, and addresses the issue
of local BSs being unable to compute their local loss due to in-
sufficient global channel information by calculating the global
loss function at the central server. However, during the training
phase, local channel samples still need to be uploaded to the
central server at each iteration, and the training is conducted
in a partially centralized manner. Besides, uploading large
datasets incurs significant communication overhead and raises
privacy concerns, which is is not conducive to the subsequent
fine-tuning of the model. To further reduce the communication
overhead in the absence of global channel information, we
propose a fully decentralized beamforming framework based
on HFL, which leverages the knowledge from all participating
BSs while maintaining decentralized local datasets throughout
both training and online deployment phases.
A. The proposed loss function
As mentioned in the previous discussion, it is essential to
understand the inherent complexity for calculating the ICI
experienced by the local users and intended target at each BS
due to the lack of global channel information. In conclusion,
the problem (9) cannot be solved directly in a distributed
manner. Given the constraint of local channel information, we
aim at designing a loss function for controlling the ICI that
does not rely on direct access to global channel information
from other BSs. Based on real-world conditions, we consider
the following two cases.
1) Interference-dominant scenario: Interference-dominant
scenario typically arises as the useful signal power increases,
or when more users/targets move closer to the cell edges.
At this point, the ICI becomes a more significant factor in
affecting the network performance [13]. Therefore, our goal
is to minimize ICI to enhance both the user experience at
the cell edges and the sensing performance. Following the
workaround in [41], we define the communication interference
leakage (CIL)
Φc
m(Wm) =
M
X
n̸=m
K
X
i=1
|hH
m,n,iWm|2.
(19)
Specifically, the aim is to minimize the interference caused
to undesired receivers via generating the beamforming matrix
from the null space spanned by the interfered channels. Sim-
ilarly, each BS should also avoid the interference it causes to
other BSs when sensing the target to enhance the network-level
sensing performance, which can be accomplished by imposing
constraints on the power of the sensing interference leakage
(SIL)
Φs
m(Wm) =
M
X
n̸=m
|gH
m,nWm|2.
(20)
Employing the concept of CIL minimization allows us to
ignore the ICI in the communication rate. Accordingly, the
communication loss function Lc(Wm) is formulated by com-
bining the negative communication rate without considering
communication ICI, and the CIL (19) as the penalty term to
be minimized. This is given in (21), where α is the weighting
factor affecting the importance of CIL management. Also, we
formulate the sensing loss function Ls(Wm) as the summation
of negative radar information rate without sensing ICI, and
the SIL (20) term weighted by β, which is given in (22).
It can be verified through simulations that optimizing loss
function (21) and (22) can achieve a good performance when
the interference caused to the mth cell is eliminated by other
BSs, as shown in Section V. Obviously, both (21) and (22)
can be calculated using local channel information, thus a fully
decentralized training framework can be implemented.
2) Noise-dominant scenario: In this case, the power of
noise is much greater than that of the interference signal,
which could be due to the low transmission power of the BS
8
Lc(Wm) = −
K
X
k=1
 
log2(1 +
|hH
m,m,kwm,k|2
PK
l̸=k |hH
m,m,kwm,l|2 + σ2c
) −α
M
X
n̸=m
K
X
i=1
|hH
m,n,iwm,k|2
!
.
(21)
Ls(Wm) = −
 
log2

1 +
PK
k=1 |gH
m,mwm,k|2
σ2s

−β
M
X
n̸=m
K
X
k=1
|gH
m,nwm,k|2
!
.
(22)
or because the users/targets are concentrated near the BSs,
away from the cell edges. When the above conditions are
satisfied, managing ICI becomes less important and BSs can
focus on serving the intended users/targets by employing all
available spatial resources to achieve the multiplexing gain. At
this stage, the weighting factors of interference leakage term in
(21) and (22) can be set to α = β = 0, and the corresponding
local loss function at the mth BS is simplified into
Lc(Wm) = −
K
X
k=1
log2

1 +
|hH
m,m,kwm,k|2
PK
l̸=k |hH
m,m,kwm,l|2 + σ2c

,
(23)
Ls(Wm) = −log2

1 +
PK
k=1 |gH
m,mwm,k|2
σ2s

,
(24)
which suggests the cooperative strategy degrades to the per-
cell learning-based beamforming scheme as in [21], [25].
B. Learning-based Formulation and Training
Based on the interference leakage-based loss functions
(21) and (22), we aim at solving the following global op-
timization problem corresponding to fit the whole dataset
D = {D(m)}∀m across the BSs
min
W
M
X
m=1

ρLc(Wm) + (1 −ρ)Ls(Wm)

s.t.
tr(WmWH
m) ≤PT ,
∀m.
(25)
With the HFL framework, the above problem can be solved
in a decentralized manner with each BS solving the following
local loss minimization problem
min
Wm
ρLc(Wm) + (1 −ρ)Ls(Wm)
s.t.
tr(WmWH
m) ≤PT .
(26)
Before the offline training phase, each BS collects the local
channel samples using the method described in Section III-A.
During the training stage, the participating BSs will receive
the global model from the central server, and train the model
for multiple iterations. In this work, we adopt the algorithm
FedAvg [26] to aggregate the global model, the details of
offline training are as follows.
1) Global broadcast: At the beginning, the central server
initializes a global model, and broadcasts it to all the partici-
pating BSs through the backhual link.
2) Local training: Upon receiving the newest global model
ω(T ) at the Tth global iteration, each local BS m performs
forward propagation using the local channel dataset D(m) to
obtain a beamforming matrix Wm and computes the local loss
function at the tth local iteration, which is the weighted sum
of local communication loss (21) and sensing loss (22)
L
 Wm; ω(T )(t)
m

= ρLc
 Wm; ω(T )(t)
m

+ (1 −ρ)Ls
 Wm; ω(T )(t)
m

.
(27)
Then, the SGD algorithm is applied to update the local model
ω(T )(t+1)
m
= w(T )(t)
m
−η∇L
 Wm; ω(T )(t)
.
(28)
After multiple iterations of local training, the updated local
model parameters w(T +1) are obtained for model aggregation.
3) Local uploading: After the parallel local training, the up-
dated model parameters ω(T +1)
m
, m = 1, 2, ...M are uploaded
to the server through the backhaul link.
4) Global aggregation: Upon receiving the updated model
parameters, the server performs global aggregation by aver-
aging the received parameters [26] to get the newest global
model ω(T +1), then it decides whether to proceed with the
next iteration of training depending on the current state.
The above procedure repeats until convergence is reached
or a predefined number of iterations is completed. The key
concept is that minimizing all local loss functions will lead to
the minimization of the global loss function, thereby solving
the problem (25). The HFL-based training framework is shown
in Fig. 4. Once the training is completed, the local BSs can
use the trained network in real-time to design the beamforming
matrix. Notably, during both training and deployment phases,
the local datasets remain at the local site, which significantly
reduces the communication overhead. The HFL framework is
summarized in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 Horizontal Federated learning framework
Offline Training:
Input : concatenated channel [H(i)
m , G(i)
m ]
Output : beamformer W∗
Initialize ω(0)
for global round T = 1, 2, ... do
the server broadcasts model parameters ω(T );
for local round t = 1, 2, ... do
BSs minimize the local loss (27) and perform backward
propagation (28);
end for
BSs upload model parameters to the server;
Global aggregation: ω(T +1) ←
1
M
PM
m=1 ω(T )
m
end for
trained model ω∗feed back for local use;
Online Beamforming:
W∗
m = f([H(i)
m , G(i)
m ]; ω∗), ∀m ⊂M
C. Complexity Analysis of HFL-based beamforming
Similar to the VFL-based method, the overhead of imple-
menting HFL framework also consists of communication and
computational costs during the training phase, as well as com-
putational costs during the deployment phase. Since we are
9
TABLE I
COMPARISON OF COMMUNICATION OVERHEAD
Algorithm
Training Phase
Beamforming Phase
WMMSE[16]
\
M2KNT
VFL
(M2 + M)TKNT
\
HFL
2MBT
\
TABLE II
COMPARISON OF COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY
Algorithm
Training Phase
Beamforming Phase
WMMSE[16]
\
O(Lω(K2N2
T + KN3
T ))
VFL
O(3(MK + M + K)NT dH + NHd2
H)
O((MK + M + K)NT dH + NHd2
H)
HFL
using the neural network of the same structure as in Section III,
the computational cost during the deployment phase for HFL-
based framework, specifically the computation involved in the
forward propagation, is identical to that of VFL-based frame-
work and is given by O((MK + M + K)NT dH + NHd2
H).
While in the offline phase, accounting for the backward
propagation, the computational overhead arising from model
training in HFL-based method can also be approximated as
three times that of a single forward propagation.
In contrast to VFL-based method, the framework in this sec-
tion significantly reduces communication overhead during the
offline model training phase. Specifically, in a single training
iteration of HFL, each BS only transmits the updated model
parameters to the central server for global aggregation, instead
of the training channel samples and designed beamforming
matrices. As a result, the offline communication overhead
arises from the model parameters broadcasting and uploading
between local BSs and the server. This reduces the com-
munication overhead as the memory occupied by the model
parameters is much smaller compared to the training samples,
and makes the framework to shift from feature aggregation to
sample aggregation. Denoting the bits of the model parameters
by B, the total bits to be uploaded and downloaded during
distributed training is given by 2MBT, where T is the number
of communication rounds to achieve a predefined performance
ϵ. According to [42], the required number of communication
rounds is given by O
 1
ϵ
 (1+ 1
K )EG2+ Γ+G2
E
+G2
, where E
is the number of local training rounds and G, Γ are problem-
related constants. Besides, compared to Section III where
the global loss function is computed at the central server,
in HFL framework, the loss function will be entirely based
on locally available channel information and calculated in a
fully decentralized manner by each local BS, which leverages
the computational power of the participating BSs and offloads
the computation workload from the server. In conclusion,
this scheme achieves full decentralization during the model
training phase, which significantly reduces communication
overhead, facilitating future online model updates. For practi-
cal deployment, data compression techniques such as quanti-
zation and model pruning can be applied to further reduce the
communication overhead. The comparison of communication
overhead and computational complexity between the methods
TABLE III
SYSTEM PARAMETERS
Parameter
Value
Cell radius
500(m)
Communication path loss
3.6
Sensing path loss
2
Target RCS
1.0(m2)
Num of hidden layers NH
4
Num of neurons in hidden layers dH
512
is summarized in Table. I and II.
V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, we illustrate the performance of the proposed
FL-based beamforming frameworks via numerical simulations.
The proposed frameworks are both implemented in Python
3.11.5 and Pytorch 2.1.0 on a PC with one NVIDIA RTX
3060 GPU and 8 Intel i7-11800 CPU cores.
Table III summarizes the major hyper-parameters used for
simulation. Unless otherwise mentioned, we adopted the fol-
lowing configurations adopted in the literature [20], [21], [43]:
the number of cells M = 3, each BS is equipped with NT = 6
transmit antennas and NR = 6 receive antennas, serving
K = 2 users while sensing one point target. We produce
channel samples by randomly generating the positions of users
and targets. Specifically, the targets are assumed to be located
within the range of [−π/2, π/2] in the angular domain with
respect to each BS, while the CUs are randomly distributed
within the cell. Moreover, both communication channels and
sensing ICI channels are assumed to be Rician fading channel
with the rician factor being 3. Each local training dataset
and test dataset contains 20,000 and 2000 channel samples
respectively. During training, we apply the Adam optimizer
[44] to update the model parameters, and set weight decay
factor to be 10−6 for further alleviating the risk of overfitting.
A. Evaluation of Communication Performance
First, we evaluate the performance of the proposed methods
by comparing the achievable communication rate with that
of traditional methods under varying signal-to-noise ratios
(SNRs). In this paper, we adopt the optimization-based scheme
WMMSE [16], the per-cell deep learning-based beamforming
10
(a) Communication rate Rc versus SNRs.
(b) Radar information rate Rs versus SNRs.
Fig. 5. Comparison of communication rate Rc and radar information rate Rs under different SNRs between the proposed methods and benchmarks.
method [21], and the closed-form solutions maximum ratio
transmission (MRT) [45] and the interference minimizing
transmission (IMT) [46] as benchmarks. Fig. 5(a) shows the
communication performance of our proposed methods when
ρ = 0.99. Throughout the increasing SNR levels, the VFL
method consistently outperforms the benchmark solutions in
all scenarios, while the HFL method approaches the perfor-
mance of the WMMSE algorithm, with only 12% performance
gap comparing to VFL. This highlights the advantages of
learning-based methods, as their computational complexity
and latency are significantly lower than those of optimization-
based approaches, while still surpassing the performance of
closed-form solutions. It is worth noting that, the commu-
nication rates achieved by per-cell DL method and MRT
scheme exhibit saturation at high SNRs (i.e., when the SNR
exceeds approximately 15 dB in this case), as the network is
becoming interference-limited in this regime. In contrast, the
other schemes, which accounts for managing ICI, shows a sig-
nificant performance improvement in interference-dominated
scenarios, and this is referred to as the interference nulling
gain. For example, when SNR = 25dB, the HFL method
achieves a 19% improvement over the per-cell DL method by
effectively constraining the interference leakage power in (21).
While with the aid of global channel information, the VFL
method increases the performance improvement to 32%. As
discussed in Section III-D and IV-C, the tradeoff between the
proposed VFL method and HFL method in terms of training
overhead and online performance suggests that they can be
tailored to suit different scenarios.
B. Evaluation of Sensing Performance
Fig. 5(b) illustrates the sensing performance of the proposed
methods when ρ is 0.01. We compare the achievable radar
information rate of our methods with the closed-form scheme
conjugate beamforming (CBF) [34], where the transmit beam-
former of the mth BS is towards the direction θm of the target
to directly maximize the sensing SNR. In addition, we adopt
the concept of unsupervised learning in [21] and replaced its
loss function from negative communication rate to negative
radar information rate, using this as the benchmark for the per-
cell DL-based method to highlight the impact of interference
Fig. 6. Beampatterns for the scenario of point target at 15◦.
elimination on sensing performance. It can be observed that
the proposed FL methods outperform CBF by up to 67%
and 30% respectively in terms of the information rate as
SNR increases, and the benefits brought by ICI elimination
is more evident compared to that in communications in low
SNRs. The result indicates that sensing ICI becomes a more
dominant factor than noises and useful signal which suffers
from round-trip pathloss affecting the sensing performance,
which aligns with the conclusion drawn in [12]. It is also
worth noting that the curve of per-cell DL method overlaps
with the curve of CBF. This is because when each BS is
sensing only one target at the same time without considering
the ICI, maximizing the illumination power will lead to the
maximum radar information rate towards the target, at which
point the principles of per-cell DL method and CBF are
the same. Overall, these findings highlight the importance of
incorporating ILM for optimizing both communication and
sensing performance in multi-cell ISAC systems.
The beampatterns obtained by different methods are shown
in Figure. 6. We assume the serving BS is equipped with
NT = NR = 16 antennas and senses a point target located at
θ = 15◦, while two adjacent BSs are located at 0◦and 60◦.
The result shows that the mainlobes of the transmit waveforms
obtained by different methods align with the direction of the
intended target, which can maximize the target illumination
power. However, this cannot guarantee optimal network-level
sensing performance, especially in the presence of ICI, as
11
(a) Communication rate Rc versus number of transmit
antennas.
(b) Radar information rate Rs versus number of trans-
mit antennas.
Fig. 7. Comparison of communication rate Rc and radar information rate Rs with respect to the number of antennas NT between the proposed methods
and benchmarks.
(a) S&C tradeoff under different SNRs.
(b) S&C tradeoff under different numbers of transmit
antennas.
Fig. 8. Tradeoff betweem communication rate Rc and radar information rate Rs when ρ ranges from 0.1 to 0.9.
the unintended signal power leaking to surrounding BSs can
disrupt their sensing. It is observed that the beampattern of
per-cell DL method closely resembles that obtained by CBF
method, which disregards the effect of sensing ICI towards
adjacent BSs. Therefore, these two methods achieve the lowest
sum radar information rate. In contrast, the beampattern of
the VFL method exhibits rapid sidelobe attenuation at both
0◦and 60◦, leading to less power leakage to the directions
of adjacent BSs. By leveraging global channel information to
train the local DNNs, this method maximally eliminates ICI
to enhance the sensing performance. Similarly, by controlling
interference leakage power using local channel information,
the HFL method also achieves sensing interference nulling and
the radar information rate comparable to that of VFL method.
C. Impact of the Number of Antennas
In this section, we evaluate the S&C performance of the
proposed beamforming designs when varying the number of
transmit antennas NT ∈{2, 4, 6, 8, 10}. Fig. 7(a) and Fig. 7(b)
show the achievable communication and radar information
rate with respect to the number of antennas. This result
demonstrates that our approaches exhibit good generalization
capabilities across different antenna configurations. Besides, it
is obvious that as the number of transmit antennas increases,
the performance improvement of both VFL and HFL methods
compared to per-cell DL method becomes more significant.
This indicates that having access to global information and
eliminating the ICI can greatly enhance both network-level
S&C performance. Therefore, we can conclude that when the
spatial degrees of freedom are sufficient, eliminating ICI can
lead to significant overall performance improvements for the
network. By optimizing the use of available spatial resources,
interference nulling becomes more impactful, especially in
dense networks or scenarios with multiple users/targets at the
cell edges.
D. Tradeoff Between Communication and Sensing
The tradeoff profiles of the communication performance
and sensing performance are shown in Fig. 8. First, Fig. 8(a)
illustrates the S&C performance tradeoff under different SNRs,
where each point represents the achievable communication
rate Rc and radar information rate Rs as ρ in (9) ranges
from 0.1 to 0.9. Time-sharing scheme is introduced to evaluate
the performance of our methods, which is achieved based on
the two corner points. The boundary of the (Rc, Rs) region
is viewed as the Pareto front constituted by the achieved
performance tradeoff. From Fig. 8(a), it can be observed that
12
(a) Effect of pruning to HFL method.
(b) Effect of pruning to VFL method.
Fig. 9. Performance vs complexity trade-off: effect of model pruning to the beamforming DNNs trained with different frameworks.
the boundaries of both HFL method and VFL method exhibit a
gradual expansion as SNR increases, and the (Rc, Rs) region
of proposed methods increase noticeably compared to time-
sharing scheme at a higher SNR. For instance, with SNR=
20dB, HFL method and VFL method outperform the time-
sharing scheme by up to 29% and 39% respectively, in terms
of the radar information rate under the same communication
rate. When SNR rises to 30dB, the improvements reach 33%
50% respectively. This suggests that the S&C gain become
more significant as more power is allocated and global channel
information becomes available, leading to enhanced overall
performance.
Second, Fig. 8(b) shows the effectiveness and generalization
of proposed methods under different numbers of transmit
antennas when SNR= 30dB. Similar to the observed trend
depicted in Fig. 8(a), the (Rc, Rs) regions of both methods
expand gradually compared to the times-sharing scheme when
more transmit antennas are available. Specifically, for the HFL
method, when fixing the communication rate, the achievable
information rate is 31% higher than that of the time-sharing
scheme with NT
= 8. While with NT
= 12 deployed,
this performance gap increases to 47%. Meanwhile, the VFL
method can improve the radar information rate by up to 35%
and 51% when NT
= 8 and NT
= 12 respectively as
compared to the time-sharing scheme. This result demonstrates
that our methods effectively leverage the available spatial
DoFs, and the performance gain from eliminating ICI increases
as the number of transmit antennas grows. The enhanced DoFs
allow for more efficient interference management, leading to
significant improvements in both network-level sensing and
communication performance as antenna numbers scale up.
E. A Scalable Perfromance vs Complexity Trade-off
Considering the low latency and low overhead require-
ments in practical deployments, we apply model pruning
[47] technique to further improve the model’s efficiency. We
compress the model size by removing less important weights
and connections, with the amount removed controlled by the
pruning factor. Fig. 9 shows that by selecting an appropriate
pruning factor, the model’s complexity and memory usage can
be significantly reduced while maintaining performance. For
instance, the horizontal lines in the figures indicate the point
at which the model performance drops to approximately 95%
threshold, while both methods can maintain the performance
above the threshold after removing 50%-60% of redundant
nodes. At this point, the S&C performance of both methods
still surpass the closed-form solutions, while computational
efficiency has been greatly improved. This allows for flexible
adjustment of the pruning factor in practical deployments,
facilitating a dynamic balance between performance and com-
putational complexity according to specific operational re-
quirements.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed two federated learning-based
frameworks for the downlink beamforming design in multi-cell
ISAC. We formulated the optimization problem to maximize
the weighted sum of the system communication rate and
radar information rate, and utilized the federated learning
technique to find the optimal solutions efficiently. The first
solution is based on the VFL framework, where the central
server aggregates the channel information, and provides global
information to train the local models. Considering the issue of
deployment flexibility and training cost, we subsequently pro-
posed the HFL method and the interference leakage-based loss
function to enable a fully decentralized ICI management. The
models trained under both frameworks can operate without
global channel information. Through numerical simulations,
we demonstrated that our solutions can achieve performance
comparable to traditional centralized methods while offering
significant improvements in computational efficiency and scal-
ability, making it suitable for practical deployments. Our future
work will involve advanced scenarios and individual target
sensing requirements.
REFERENCES
[1] F. Liu, C. Masouros, A. P. Petropulu, H. Griffiths, and L. Hanzo, “Joint
radar and communication design: Applications, state-of-the-art, and the
road ahead,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 68, no. 6, pp.
3834–3862, 2020.
[2] J. A. Zhang, F. Liu, C. Masouros, R. W. Heath, Z. Feng, L. Zheng, and
A. Petropulu, “An overview of signal processing techniques for joint
communication and radar sensing,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in
Signal Processing, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1295–1315, 2021.
13
[3] F. Liu, Y. Cui, C. Masouros, J. Xu, T. X. Han, Y. C. Eldar, and S. Buzzi,
“Integrated sensing and communications: Toward dual-functional wire-
less networks for 6g and beyond,” IEEE journal on selected areas in
communications, vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 1728–1767, 2022.
[4] K. Meng, C. Masouros, A. P. Petropulu, and L. Hanzo, “Cooperative
ISAC networks: Performance analysis, scaling laws and optimization,”
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, 2024.
[5] K. Meng, Q. Wu, W. Chen, and D. Li, “Sensing-assisted communication
in vehicular networks with intelligent surface,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, vol. 73, no. 1, pp. 876–893, 2024.
[6] F. Liu, L. Zhou, C. Masouros, A. Li, W. Luo, and A. Petropulu, “To-
ward dual-functional radar-communication systems: Optimal waveform
design,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 66, no. 16, pp.
4264–4279, 2018.
[7] X. Liu, T. Huang, N. Shlezinger, Y. Liu, J. Zhou, and Y. C. Eldar, “Joint
transmit beamforming for multiuser MIMO communications and MIMO
radar,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 68, pp. 3929–3944,
2020.
[8] F. Dong, W. Wang, Z. Hu, and T. Hui, “Low-complexity beamformer
design for joint radar and communications systems,” IEEE Communi-
cations Letters, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 259–263, 2020.
[9] F. Liu, Y.-F. Liu, A. Li, C. Masouros, and Y. C. Eldar, “Cram´er-rao
bound optimization for joint radar-communication beamforming,” IEEE
Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 70, pp. 240–253, 2021.
[10] H. Hua, J. Xu, and T. X. Han, “Optimal transmit beamforming for
integrated sensing and communication,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, vol. 72, no. 8, pp. 10 588–10 603, 2023.
[11] J. Li, G. Zhou, T. Gong, and N. Liu, “A framework for mutual
information-based MIMO integrated sensing and communication beam-
forming design,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 2024.
[12] K. Meng, C. Masouros, G. Chen, and F. Liu, “Network-level inte-
grated sensing and communication: Interference management and BS
coordination using stochastic geometry,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, p. early access, 2024.
[13] K. Meng, C. Masouros, A. P. Petropulu, and L. Hanzo, “Cooperative
ISAC networks: Opportunities and challenges,” IEEE Wireless Commu-
nications, 2024.
[14] N. Babu, C. Masouros, C. B. Papadias, and Y. C. Eldar, “Precoding
for multi-cell ISAC: from coordinated beamforming to coordinated
multipoint and bi-static sensing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.18387,
2024.
[15] K. Qian, W.-Q. Wang, and H. Shao, “Low-complexity transmit antenna
selection and beamforming for large-scale MIMO communications,”
International Journal of Antennas and Propagation, vol. 2014, no. 1,
p. 159375, 2014.
[16] Q. Shi, M. Razaviyayn, Z.-Q. Luo, and C. He, “An iteratively weighted
mmse approach to distributed sum-utility maximization for a MIMO
interfering broadcast channel,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing,
vol. 59, no. 9, pp. 4331–4340, 2011.
[17] Y. Peng, S. Yang, W. Lyu, Y. Li, H. He, Z. Zhang, and C. Assi, “Mutual
information-based integrated sensing and communications: A wmmse
framework,” IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, 2024.
[18] A. M. Elbir, K. V. Mishra, S. A. Vorobyov, and R. W. Heath, “Twenty-
five years of advances in beamforming: From convex and nonconvex
optimization to learning techniques,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine,
vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 118–131, 2023.
[19] H. Sun, X. Chen, Q. Shi, M. Hong, X. Fu, and N. D. Sidiropoulos,
“Learning to optimize: Training deep neural networks for interference
management,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 66, no. 20,
pp. 5438–5453, 2018.
[20] W. Xia, G. Zheng, Y. Zhu, J. Zhang, J. Wang, and A. P. Petropulu,
“A deep learning framework for optimization of MISO downlink beam-
forming,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 68, no. 3, pp.
1866–1880, 2019.
[21] H. Huang, W. Xia, J. Xiong, J. Yang, G. Zheng, and X. Zhu, “Unsu-
pervised learning-based fast beamforming design for downlink MIMO,”
IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 7599–7605, 2018.
[22] T. Lin and Y. Zhu, “Beamforming design for large-scale antenna arrays
using deep learning,” IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, vol. 9,
no. 1, pp. 103–107, 2019.
[23] H. Hojatian, J. Nadal, J.-F. Frigon, and F. Leduc-Primeau, “Unsuper-
vised deep learning for massive MIMO hybrid beamforming,” IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 20, no. 11, pp. 7086–
7099, 2021.
[24] F. Jia, Y. Lei, J. Lin, X. Zhou, and N. Lu, “Deep neural networks: A
promising tool for fault characteristic mining and intelligent diagnosis of
rotating machinery with massive data,” Mechanical systems and signal
processing, vol. 72, pp. 303–315, 2016.
[25] R. P. Sankar, S. S. Nair, S. Doshi, and S. P. Chepuri, “Learning to
precode for integrated sensing and communication systems,” in 2023
31st European Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO). IEEE, 2023,
pp. 695–699.
[26] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y Arcas,
“Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
data,” in Artificial intelligence and statistics.
PMLR, 2017, pp. 1273–
1282.
[27] M. Chen, D. G¨und¨uz, K. Huang, W. Saad, M. Bennis, A. V. Feljan,
and H. V. Poor, “Distributed learning in wireless networks: Recent
progress and future challenges,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, vol. 39, no. 12, pp. 3579–3605, 2021.
[28] A. M. Elbir and S. Coleri, “Federated learning for hybrid beamforming
in mm-wave massive MIMO,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 24,
no. 12, pp. 2795–2799, 2020.
[29] ——, “Federated learning for channel estimation in conventional and
ris-assisted massive MIMO,” IEEE transactions on wireless communi-
cations, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 4255–4268, 2021.
[30] A. M. Elbir, A. K. Papazafeiropoulos, and S. Chatzinotas, “Federated
learning for physical layer design,” IEEE Communications Magazine,
vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 81–87, 2021.
[31] Q. Yi, P. Yang, Z. Liu, Y. Huang, and S. Zammit, “Model-driven
federated learning for channel estimation in millimeter-wave massive
MIMO systems,” in 2024 IEEE Wireless Communications and Network-
ing Conference (WCNC).
IEEE, 2024, pp. 1–6.
[32] H. Huang, Y. Peng, J. Yang, W. Xia, and G. Gui, “Fast beamforming
design via deep learning,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 1065–1069, 2019.
[33] D. Wang, M. Tao, X. Zeng, and J. Liang, “Federated learning for
precoding design in cell-free massive MIMO systems,” IEEE Open
Journal of the Communications Society, 2023.
[34] U.
Demirhan
and
A.
Alkhateeb,
“Cell-free
ISAC
MIMO
sys-
tems: Joint sensing and communication beamforming,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2301.11328, 2023.
[35] P. Stoica, J. Li, and Y. Xie, “On probing signal design for MIMO radar,”
IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 55, no. 8, pp. 4151–4161,
2007.
[36] Y. Yang and R. S. Blum, “MIMO radar waveform design based on
mutual information and minimum mean-square error estimation,” IEEE
Transactions on Aerospace and electronic systems, vol. 43, no. 1, pp.
330–343, 2007.
[37] K. Hornik, M. Stinchcombe, and H. White, “Multilayer feedforward
networks are universal approximators,” Neural networks, vol. 2, no. 5,
pp. 359–366, 1989.
[38] A. L. Maas, A. Y. Hannun, A. Y. Ng et al., “Rectifier nonlinearities
improve neural network acoustic models,” in Proc. icml, vol. 30, no. 1.
Atlanta, GA, 2013, p. 3.
[39] S.-i. Amari, “Backpropagation and stochastic gradient descent method,”
Neurocomputing, vol. 5, no. 4-5, pp. 185–196, 1993.
[40] Q. Hu, Y. Cai, Q. Shi, K. Xu, G. Yu, and Z. Ding, “Iterative algorithm
induced deep-unfolding neural networks: Precoding design for mul-
tiuser MIMO systems,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications,
vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1394–1410, 2020.
[41] N. Babu and C. Masouros, “Multi-cell coordinated joint sensing and
communications,” in 2023 57th Asilomar Conference on Signals, Sys-
tems, and Computers.
IEEE, 2023, pp. 763–767.
[42] X. Li, K. Huang, W. Yang, S. Wang, and Z. Zhang, “On the convergence
of fedavg on non-iid data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02189, 2019.
[43] J. Kim, H. Lee, S.-E. Hong, and S.-H. Park, “Deep learning methods for
universal miso beamforming,” IEEE Wireless Communications Letters,
vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 1894–1898, 2020.
[44] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
[45] N. Fatema, G. Hua, Y. Xiang, D. Peng, and I. Natgunanathan, “Massive
MIMO linear precoding: A survey,” IEEE systems journal, vol. 12, no. 4,
pp. 3920–3931, 2017.
[46] R. Zakhour, Z. K. Ho, and D. Gesbert, “Distributed beamforming
coordination in multicell MIMO channels,” in VTC Spring 2009-IEEE
69th Vehicular Technology Conference.
IEEE, 2009, pp. 1–5.
[47] S. Han, J. Pool, J. Tran, and W. Dally, “Learning both weights and con-
nections for efficient neural network,” Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol. 28, 2015.
