1
Integrated Sensing and Edge AI: Realizing
Intelligent Perception in 6G
Zhiyan Liu, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Xu Chen, Hai Wu, Zhanwei Wang, Graduate Student Member,
IEEE, Xianhao Chen, Member, IEEE, Dusit Niyato, Fellow, IEEE, and Kaibin Huang, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Sensing and edge artificial intelligence (AI) are
envisioned as two essential and interconnected functions in sixth-
generation (6G) mobile networks. On the one hand, sensing-
empowered applications rely on powerful AI models to extract
features and understand semantics from ubiquitous wireless
sensors. On the other hand, the massive amount of sensory data
serves as the fuel to continuously refine edge AI models. This
deep integration of sensing and edge AI has given rise to a
new task-oriented paradigm known as integrated sensing and
edge AI (ISEA), which features a holistic design approach to
communication, AI computation, and sensing for optimal sensing-
task performance. In this article, we present a comprehensive
survey for ISEA. We first provide technical preliminaries for
sensing, edge AI, and new communication paradigms in ISEA.
Then, we study several use cases of ISEA to demonstrate its
practical relevance and introduce current standardization and
industrial progress. Next, the design principles, metrics, tradeoffs,
and architectures of ISEA are established, followed by a thorough
overview of ISEA techniques, including digital air interface,
over-the-air computation, and advanced signal processing. Its
interplay with various 6G advancements, e.g., new physical-
layer and networking techniques, are presented. Finally, we
present future research opportunities in ISEA, including the
integration of foundation models, convergence of ISEA and
integrated sensing and communications (ISAC), ultra-low-latency
ISEA, and practicality issues.
I. INTRODUCTION
The sixth-generation (6G) mobile networks mark a remark-
able evolution in the digital era. As anticipated by ITU-R
in June 2023, the 6G landscape is shaped by a range of
Manuscript received 12 January 2025; revised 29 May 2025; accepted 19
July 2025. The work described in this paper was supported in part by the
Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region,
China under a fellowship award (HKU RFS2122-7S04), NSFC/RGC CRS
(CRS HKU702/24), the Areas of Excellence scheme grant (AoE/E-601/22-
R), Collaborative Research Fund (C1009-22G), and the Grants 17212423
& 17304925, and in part by the Shenzhen-Hong Kong-Macau Technology
Research Programme (Type C) (SGDX20230821091559018). The work of
Dusit Niyato is supported by the Singapore Ministry of Education (MOE) Tier
1 (RG87/22 and RG24/24), the NTU Centre for Computational Technologies
in Finance (NTU-CCTF), and the RIE2025 Industry Alignment Fund -
Industry Collaboration Projects (IAF-ICP) (Award I2301E0026), administered
by A*STAR, as well as supported by Alibaba Group and NTU Singapore
through Alibaba-NTU Global e-Sustainability CorpLab (ANGEL). The work
of Xianhao Chen is supported in part by the Research Grants Council of Hong
Kong under Grant 27213824 and CRS HKU702/24, and in part by HKU IDS
Research Seed Fund under Grant IDS-RSF2023-0012.
Zhiyan
Liu,
Xu
Chen,
Hai
Wu,
Zhanwei
Wang,
Xianhao
Chen,
and Kaibin Huang are with the Department of Electrical and Elec-
tronic
Engineering,
The
University
of
Hong
Kong,
Hong
Kong
(e-
mails: zyliu@eee.hku.hk; chenxu@eee.hku.hk; wuhai@eee.hku.hk; zhan-
weiw@eee.hku.hk; xchen@eee.hku.hk; huangkb@eee.hku.hk). Dusit Niyato
is with the College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological
University, Singapore (e-mail: dniyato@ntu.edu.sg). The corresponding author
is Kaibin Huang.
usage scenarios, including hyper-reliable and low-latency com-
munications (HRLLC), immersive communications, massive
connectivity, ubiquitous connectivity, integrated sensing and
communications (ISAC), and integrated artificial intelligence
(AI) and communications (IAAC) [1]. With these usage sce-
narios, 6G will support not only real-time and intensive data
transmissions but also numerous intelligence applications re-
quiring real-time intelligent operations, such as remote surgery,
autonomous driving, holographic telepresence, and digital twin
[2], [3].
As reflected by ITU usage scenarios, two prominent trends
in 6G are edge AI and sensing. On the one hand, one of the
key trends of 6G is the full integration of edge AI into mobile
networks. 6G networks can support AI provisioning with the
mobile edge computing (MEC) paradigm, delivering diverse
AI applications to resource-limited mobile devices with low
latency, reduced bandwidth, and better privacy. This leads to
a new field called edge intelligence or edge AI [4]–[6]. On
the other hand, edge intelligence must be fueled with massive
amounts of sensory data [7], [8]. Aligned with this trend, 6G
is expected to support multi-modal sensing through not only
ISAC but also the collaborative perception of massive 6G edge
devices, including connected autonomous vehicles (CAVs),
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), surveillance cameras, Inter-
net of Things (IoT) sensors [9], etc. These two trends, i.e., edge
AI and sensing, are interdependent, because edge AI relies
on massive sensory data for model training and inference,
while sensing depends on advanced AI algorithms running
at the network edge to maximize data value with reasonable
communication and computing overhead.
Although the coexistence and interdependence of commu-
nications, AI, and sensing is a natural trend in 6G, their
cooperation and integrated design for real-timeness and high
reliability (e.g., 30 ms inference latency and near 100% accu-
racy for autonomous driving [10], [11]) is faced with several
critical challenges, including communication and computation
capacity, operational complexity, security and privacy, and sus-
tainability. For instance, it is essential for current networking
architectures and air interface techniques to evolve to accom-
modate the demanding requirements in latency and reliability
of transmission and analytics of sensory data. These challenges
necessitate innovative approaches for resource management,
integrated frameworks, signal processing techniques, network-
ing architectural design, etc., all unified under a new set of
metrics and principles oriented towards optimized performance
of sensing applications. This gives rise to a new task-oriented
paradigm, integrated sensing and edge AI (ISEA), which is
arXiv:2501.06726v2  [cs.IT]  24 Jul 2025
2
the theme of this paper. In what follows, we first provide a
historical perspective of ISEA, presenting the milestones of
communications, sensing, and AI to elaborate on the grand
convergence of these three domains, and demonstrate how 6G,
as a unified communication-computing platform, can support
integrated sensing and AI in a harmonious manner. After
that, we present the major contributions of this paper with
comparisons to other works and the paper’s organization.
A. Milestones of Integrated Sensing and Edge AI
1) Milestones of Communications: The development of
modern communication technologies dates back to the 19th
century, when Samuel Morse created the first single-wire
telegraph system using the Morse code, followed by the
invention of the telephone by Alexander Graham Bell in 1876.
In terms of wireless connectivity, the major breakthrough
was made by Guglielmo Marconi, who prototyped the first
long-distance radio wave-based wireless telegraphy system
and conducted the world’s first cross-ocean radio message
transmission in 1902. The famous article “A Mathematical
Theory of Communication” by Claude Shannon published in
1948 opened the field of information theory and has guided
the modern communication system design until today, which
defines the communication problem as “reproducing at one
point either exactly or approximately a message selected at
another point”, while the semantic aspects of the said mes-
sages are regarded as “irrelevant to the engineering problem”
[12]. Therein, the Shannon-Hartley theorem characterizes the
maximum rate of errorless information transmission over a
noisy communication channel, underpinning the rate-centric
paradigms of communication system design ever since.
Building upon Shannon’s theory, the development of mo-
bile cellular networks from its first to fifth generation has
revolutionized society and lifestyles. The first generation of
mobile networks (1G), launched in 1979, were analog systems
dedicated to voice communication between mobile phones
and fixed-line telephones, adopting frequency modulation and
frequency division multiple access (FDMA). The second
generation (2G) was commercially launched in Finland in
1991. A fully digital network, 2G is revolutionary in many
aspects, such as encryption of radio signals, higher spectrum
efficiency, and the commencement of data service provision
to mobile phones albeit at a low rate of around 40 Kbps,
which makes it suitable for pure text messages. Significantly
improving the data rate to the wireless broadband level, the
third generation (3G) was first commercially launched in 2001
and reached its peak in the early 2010s, satisfying applications
such as mobile Internet access and video streaming. Such
an improvement is attributed to several technical advances,
such as code division multiple access (CDMA) and high-speed
packet access (HSPA).
From the fourth-generation (4G) onwards, mobile networks
started supporting pervasive “sensing” functionalities, marked
by techniques such as Narrowband Internet of Things (NB-
IoT), Long-Term Evolution Machine Type Communication
(LTE-M), and LTE Vehicle-to-Everything (LTE-V2X) com-
munications to support machine-type and IoT techniques.
The 4G networks were first commercially deployed in 2009,
pushing the downlink data rate beyond 100 Mbps. Long-
term evolution (LTE) is the major standard for 4G, featuring
orthogonal frequency-division multiple access (OFDMA) and
all-IP mobile networks. In 3GPP Release 13 (LTE Advanced
Pro), frozen in June 2016, both NB-IoT and LTE-M were
developed by 3GPP to support massive IoT devices and
sensors in low-power wide-area networks (LPWANs), transit-
ing mobile networks to a network of sensors. In the 3GPP
Release 14 LTE standard in 2017, cellular V2X was first
introduced to support communications between vehicles and
road infrastructure, where vehicles are equipped with powerful
multi-modal sensors to perceive environments.
The fifth-generation (5G), beginning its deployment in
2019, evolves into an integrated platform for communications,
computing, and sensing, which provides enhancements for the
aforementioned services in 4G. It features three main applica-
tion areas, i.e., Enhanced Mobile Broadband (eMBB), Massive
Machine-type Communications (mMTC), and Ultra-reliable
and Low Latency Communications (URLLC). Therein, eMBB
specifies higher data rates up to 1 Gbps for indoor, URLLC
targets mission-critical applications that require ultra-high reli-
ability, e.g., 99.9999%, and low end-to-end (E2E) latency, e.g.,
50ms and mMTC supports scenarios with dense IoT sensor
access. Moreover, 5G New Radio (NR) V2X supports more
advanced sensing applications for connected and autonomous
vehicles, including extended sensor sharing that enables the
exchange of raw or processed data gathered among vehicles,
roadside units, devices of pedestrian, and V2X application
servers [13]. As evident, the mission of 5G extends beyond
supporting data exchange from massive low-end IoT sensors.
It also supports intensive data transmissions from high-end
sensors, such as cameras and Light Detection and Ranging
(LiDAR) on vehicles.
Following the pace of evolution, i.e., 10 years for each
generation, 6G is projected to be launched around 2030.
The academia is actively pushing forward several potential
technologies envisioned to play vital roles in 6G. HRLLC,
immersive communications, and massive connectivity are ex-
tended from 5G usage scenarios, namely enhanced eMBB,
mMTC, and URLLC, taking into account more stringent
performance requirements in 6G applications. For instance,
HRLLC will extend the performance limits of 5G URLLC,
aiming to enable real-time (sub-millisecond level) applications
in diverse sectors such as remote surgery and autonomous driv-
ing [14]. Immersive communications will support advanced
applications like holographic telepresence, providing lifelike,
three-dimensional communication experiences to revolutionize
remote work, education, and social interactions [2], [15].
Meanwhile, massive communications will connect billions of
devices seamlessly, fostering the dramatic growth of the IoT.
On the other hand, as alluded to earlier, ISAC and IAAC
are two new usage scenarios compared with 5G. ISAC with
multi-functional waveforms, which can be traced back to
1960s [16], has recently gained emerging attention owing to
massive Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (MIMO) and higher
frequency bands. Another important shift is the sink of AI
provisioning to edge nodes, resulting in the integrated de-
3
sign of wireless communications and AI. Joint efforts from
academia and standardization organizations share the common
objective of moving from the rate-centric paradigm to task-
oriented application provisioning underpinned by integrated
AI, communications, and sensing.
2) Milestones of Sensing: Modern sensing emerged with
the development of electrical and electronic techniques which
enabled machines to capture, record, and transmit sensory
information. The 20th century saw the first use of radio
waves in sensing, such as radio detection and ranging (Radar)
developed by Robert Watson-Watt, which has since played a
central role in remote sensing applications. Radar techniques
were used to process data gathered from the propagation and
reflection of radio waves, revealing the distance, speed, and
direction of objects.
Since the late 20th century, advancements in electronics
and communication techniques have led to an era where
sophisticated sensing systems were established. For instance,
evolving with satellite technology, the Global Positioning
System (GPS), was launched in 1978 to enable precise location
sensing worldwide. Later than this, the development of other
global navigation systems began: GLONASS (1982), Beidou
(2000), and Galileo (2011). On the other hand, the invention
of transistors at Bell Labs in 1947 marked the beginning of
the miniaturization and integration of sensing devices. The
emergence of microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) in the
1980s further allowed for the miniaturization of mechanical
and electro-mechanical elements integrated into chips, which
are now widely used in various sensors including accelerome-
ters, gyroscopes, and pressure sensors. Concurrently, advanced
optical sensors and fiber optics were developed for efficient
telecommunications and precise measurements.
The early 2000s witnessed the emergence of sensing de-
vices, termed “smart devices”, that are endowed with the ca-
pability of real-time data processing by integrating lightweight
processors and chips with sensors. This allows for access to
not only raw sensory data but also a timely interpretation of
the meaning underlying them. For example, wearable devices
including fitness trackers and smartwatches can monitor and
record health metrics and report immediately when human
abnormalities are detected.
From the 2010s to the present, IoT sensing gained extensive
attention, where smart environments from homes to cities
were enabled via the vast networks of interconnected diverse
sensors including cameras, motion sensors, depth sensors,
accelerometers, etc. The capture multi-modal sensory data
gathered at IoT sensors are shared and analyzed (globally or
in a distributed manner) to track trends and gather insights
about everything from efficiency and energy use in factories
to traffic jams to personal conditions. Furthermore, powerful
AI algorithms emerged to support complicated sensory data
processing and interpretation, leading to more autonomous and
intelligent systems [17]. Moreover, interest in quantum sensing
and its deployment grew significantly. Quantum sensors can
leverage entanglement, single photons, and squeezed states
to perform extremely precise measurements (e.g., nanometer-
level resolution [18]), beating limits in traditional sensing
technology.
Looking ahead to the future trend, we envision AI-driven
autonomous sensory devices with hyper-connection. For one
thing, the sensors are expected to be integrated with biological
systems, in which the realized tactile sensing will be the key
component for future digital twins and real-time e-healthcare
including health monitoring and diagnostics. For another, the
miniaturization of sensors will continue. Extremely small
sensors can find wide applications in medical diagnostics, en-
vironmental monitoring, and industrial processes. More impor-
tantly, enhanced connectivity in 5G and 6G will facilitate the
deployment and integration of advanced sensing technologies
in real-time applications.
3) Milestones of AI: The history of AI has witnessed
remarkable milestones and significant advancements since its
inception. Tracing back to 1950, Alan Turing introduced
the concept of machine intelligence and proposed the Tur-
ing Test as a criterion for evaluating a machine’s ability
to exhibit human-like intelligence. In 1956, the Dartmouth
Conference marked the birth of AI as a formal research field.
Throughout the 1960s, early AI programs, such as Arthur
Samuel’s checkers-playing program and John McCarthy’s Lisp
programming language, showcased basic problem-solving and
symbolic processing capabilities. However, Marvin Minsky
and Seymour Papert’s book “Perceptrons” (1969) emphasized
the limitations of early neural networks, resulting in a tempo-
rary decline in AI research funding. The 1980s saw machine
learning emerge as a subfield of AI, with algorithms such
as decision trees, reinforcement learning, and support vector
machines enabling AI systems to learn from data and improve
their performance over time. In the 1990s, researchers devel-
oped probabilistic and statistical methods, including Bayesian
networks and hidden Markov models, allowing AI systems
to handle uncertainty and make inferences from incomplete or
noisy data. A significant milestone was achieved in 1997 when
IBM’s Deep Blue defeated world chess champion Garry Kas-
parov, showcasing the capabilities of AI in complex decision-
making tasks.
The rise of big data and the development of deep learning
(DL) techniques in the 2000s led to significant improve-
ments in areas like computer vision and natural language
processing. AlexNet, a deep convolutional neural network,
won the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge
in 2012, marking a turning point in the adoption of DL
for image recognition tasks. This achievement spurred the
development of more advanced architectures, such as VGG,
Inception, and ResNet. In 2016, DeepMind’s AlphaGo, an
AI system that combines DL and Monte Carlo Tree Search,
defeated the world champion in the ancient game of Go,
demonstrating advances in AI’s ability to tackle complex
problems. The advent of Transformer models, introduced by
Vaswani et al. in 2017, has brought significant advancements in
natural language processing (NLP) tasks. Transformers utilize
self-attention mechanisms to capture long-range dependencies
and parallelize computation, making them highly effective
in processing large-scale language data. The success of DL
can be largely attributed to the availability of large datasets,
powerful computational resources such as graphics processing
units (GPUs), and improvements in neural network architec-
4
tures and optimization techniques. In particular, the exploding
computational capability enables exhaustive pre-training over
a vast amount of data on the Internet, nurturing cutting-edge
foundation models like Generative Pre-trained Transformer 3
(GPT-3) by OpenAI. ChatGPT, a sibling model to GPT-3,
exemplifies the success of foundation models in generating
human-like text. By leveraging the pre-training and fine-tuning
approach, ChatGPT can understand context, answer questions,
provide recommendations, and even engage in creative tasks
like writing and storytelling.
Despite the booming of AI, challenges remain in terms
of computational efficiency, robustness, and ethical consider-
ations, which are essential aspects for the future development
of AI. As researchers and practitioners continue to push the
boundaries of AI, especially pushing AI towards the network
edge to support ubiquitous and real-time intelligent applica-
tions in the era of 6G, where edge AI is a core research
direction.
B. Evolving towards Integrated Sensing and Edge AI
As the technologies of communication, sensing, and AI
evolve, an emerging trend is the convergence of the three tech-
nologies due to their tight coupling in 6G killer applications,
with the examples given shortly in Section III. Specifically,
sensing and AI become deeply coupled, as state-of-the-art
sensing techniques are largely built on AI-based backbones
for sensing analytics, and conversely, AI model training relies
on the large bulk of data generated by sensors to distill
intelligence. However, this training-and-inference process is
not achieved by a single all-in-one node but through the
cooperation of sensors, terminal user devices, and computation
nodes distributed in the network, rendering communication as
an indispensable component and key factor in the E2E task
performance.
Traditional designs of communication systems, however,
treat sensing and AI as independent applications that operate
on the Application Layer of the network, while the underlying
communication infrastructure, e.g., previous generations of
mobile networks, is designed in a rate-oriented manner agnos-
tic to the information semantics. Such paradigms are inherently
sub-optimal in terms of task performance and inadequate for
satisfying the Quality of Service (QoS) requirements as the
data volume, AI model complexity, and number of nodes scale
dramatically. Instead, 6G is envisioned to be AI-native with
deep communication-computation (C2) integration and task-
oriented optimization for the highest efficiency in supporting
AI-based applications. The air-interface technologies for AI-
empowered tasks are thus designed with different principles
from previous ones aimed at errorless bit transmission, focus-
ing instead on efficient reproduction of sensory information
in a manner effective for the downstream sensing task. Ex-
amples include joint source-channel coding (JSCC) as well
as data-aware access control and resource allocation. For
multi-access scenarios, an outstanding example is over-the-air
computation (AirComp), which exploits the waveform super-
position property of wireless channels to realize computation
of aggregation functions by simultaneous access of sensors.
These new communication paradigms are expected to be a
key system component seamlessly coupled with and optimized
for sensing tasks. In addition, the network itself shall feature
sensing as an inherent capability, e.g., network-as-a-sensor,
through multifunctional waveforms and native support for a
massive number of networked sensors. Thus, we argue that
the integrated design of communication, sensing and AI, which
involves cross-layer synergy for optimized task performance,
is an inevitable trend of technical advancements. On the other
hand, it has become a consensus that the support of low-
latency and high-reliability AI applications would require the
AI computation power to be distributed in edge networks
instead of relying solely on cloud data centers. Hence, in
this paper, we incorporate sensing, AI, and communications
featuring edge networks into a unified framework, ISEA,
oriented towards E2E task performance by integrated design
and optimization of the three components.
C. Comparisons with Relevant Works and Our Contribution
ISEA is a novel paradigm that integrates the acquisition,
storage and transmission of sensing data with AI at the
mobile edge to achieve low latency, high reliability and
native intelligence for various sensing-assisted applications.
ISEA is connected to two other emerging concepts in 6G,
ISAC and semantic communications (SemCom), but is still
fundamentally different due to its new application scenarios,
design goals and approaches, as elaborated below.
• Comparisons with ISAC: ISAC jointly designs RF sens-
ing and communication, improving resource utilization
through their coexistence and mutual assistance within
the same hardware, spectrum and waveform [19]–[21].
Both ISEA and ISAC view sensing as a built-in function
of the mobile network, not an independent module built
on separate devices that interface with the network’s
application layer. Also, both paradigms exploit radio-
frequency (RF) sensing potentially with multi-functional
waveforms in millimeter wave (mmWave) or terahertz
(THz) frequency bands. Positioning, ranging, tracking,
and satellite-air-ground network are considered as impor-
tant application scenarios by both ISEA and ISAC, as
depicted in Fig. 1.
Despite these similarities, ISEA and ISAC still exhibit
fundamental differences. Sensing in ISAC almost solely
refers to RF sensing, and the main motivation of ISAC
studies is the integration of RF sensing and wireless
communication systems due to their similar hardware and
signaling. In ISEA, however, sensing is a broader concept
not limited to RF sensing but includes multiple modalities
such as Red-Green-Blue (RGB) cameras, LiDARs, and
event cameras. This leads to several unique characteristics
of ISEA. First, the rich but latent semantics embedded in
these sensing modalities, e.g., images and videos, render
the AI model indispensable for understanding sensing
data and making decisions in ISEA, as compared to
ISAC, which mainly focuses on RF signal processing.
Moreover, ISEA requires a dedicated communication
design for sensing tasks due to the high data dimension-
ality and the constant data exchanges among network
5
✓Sensing-assisted commun.
⚫
Dual-functional waveform
⚫
Hardware co-design
✓Camera- & LiDAR-based
object detection
✓SLAM & semantic
segmentation
✓Robotic planning &
control
✓CAV/UAV collaborative 
perception
✓IoT digital twin
✓AI-based dialog system
⚫
NLP-based text compression
SemCom
ISAC
ISEA
⚫
Task-oriented digital multi-access
⚫
AirComp-based air interface
⚫
On-the-fly comput. & commun.
⚫
Multi-sensor fusion
⚫
Multi-functional waveform
✓Satellite-air-ground
integrated network
✓Positioning & tracking
⚫
mmWave & THz imaging
✓Human-machine
symbiosis
⚫
Joint source-channel coding
⚫
Edge computation offloading
⚫
Foundation models & generative AI
⚫
Multi-modality sensory fusion
⚫
Wireless for distributed inference 
and learning
✓Applications
⚫
Techniques
⚫
Wireless for distributed feature 
extraction and selection
✓Image/video reconstruction
⚫
Semantic encoder-decoder
⚫
Knowledge base
✓RF ranging
⚫
RF signal processing
Overlaps
Fig. 1.
Differences and overlappings in terms of the scopes of ISEA compared with ISAC and SemCom. Compared with ISAC, which focuses on the
integration and mutual assistance of RF sensing and communication, ISEA features multiple sensing modalities and joint communication-computation design
for optimized performance of AI-based sensing tasks, serving applications that require rich environmental semantics. Compared with SemCom, ISEA targets
specific sensing tasks and involves the joint design of a broader range of operations and components.
nodes for computation offloading and cooperation. On
the other hand, in ISAC, communication is generally
not for exchanging sensory data but for normal data
traffic coexisting with sensing. This results in distinctions
between ISEA and ISAC in terms of key supporting
techniques, as illustrated in Fig. 1. In terms of applica-
tion scenarios, ISEA supports higher-level sensing tasks
such as semantic segmentation and robotic planning and
control due to multi-modality and AI capabilities, while
ISAC mainly targets positioning, ranging, and physical
layer applications, i.e., sensing-assisted communications.
• Comparisons with SemCom: SemCom goes beyond
the traditional paradigm of building reliable bit pipes,
aiming instead at the efficient transmission of informa-
tion semantics via AI-based encoder-decoders and shared
knowledge bases [22], [23]. The greatest common point
between ISEA and SemCom is the native integration of
AI models into the communication system to understand,
compress and reconstruct semantics from multi-modal
data for efficient communication beyond Shannon’s limit.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, both paradigms are empowered by
a common set of enabling techniques, including wireless
architectures for distributed inference and learning, se-
mantic encoder-decoder frameworks, joint source-channel
coding, and the adoption of foundation models and
generative AI for enhanced semantic representation and
generalization. These techniques collectively facilitate a
shift from symbol-level fidelity to meaning-level accu-
racy, providing the platform for diverse human-machine
interaction applications.
However, the goals of ISEA and SemCom are fundamen-
tally different. SemCom aims at best semantic reconstruc-
tion over a transmitter-receiver pair under given semantic
similarity metrics, e.g., sentence similarity [24] for texts
and DL-based similarity for images. In contrast, ISEA
focuses on the effectiveness aspect of communication,
i.e., the maximization of E2E sensing task performance,
e.g., object detection precision and robotic object re-
trieval accuracy. In addition, while SemCom focuses on
one or multiple communication links, ISEA requires the
orchestration of a broader coverage of components and
operations as involved by the sensing task, e.g., sensing
signal processing, data storage, model fine-tuning with
sensory data, etc. Further, the different scopes in terms
of applications and techniques are illustrated in Fig. 1.
Overall, the proposed ISEA framework fundamentally
differs from ISAC’s resource-sharing paradigm (optimizing
communication-sensing trade-offs) and SemCom’s semantic
compression (balancing bandwidth against contextual distor-
tion). By jointly optimizing AI, communication, and sensing
subsystems under an end-to-end performance criterion, ISEA
transforms traditional component-level trade-offs - such as
data delivery precision-latency compromise or model split-
ting’s computation-communication balance - into tunable
parameters for global optimization [25]. This system-level
approach enables superior adaptability where conventional
paradigms must make hard resource partitioning decisions.
Several surveys and reviews are related to the topic of
ISEA [5], [9], [20], [26]–[29]. Specifically, [28] introduces
the integration of AI, IoT, and edge computing, surveys its
potential applications, and enables techniques for AI inference
in IoT with end-edge-cloud orchestration as well as decentral-
ized edge learning. In [5], the authors review energy-efficient
design techniques for edge AI operations, i.e., data acquisition,
training and inference, to fit AI capabilities into resource-
limited wireless edge networks. However, these works [5],
[28] focus on the general edge AI where sensing is one of its
applications without a thorough discussion on sensing-oriented
techniques. From the sensing perspective, [29] investigates
the design issues for collaborative sensing including sensing
models, deployment and scheduling techniques, and metrics.
However, the main focus is solutions for sensing coverage
maximization, not covering wireless link issues or downstream
inference. [20] discusses the advances in joint radar sensing
and communications with applications to localization and
sensing applications in IoT, which, however, does not involve
6
TABLE I
COMPARISONS WITH RELATED SURVEY PAPERS
Ref.
Sensing Modalities
Performance Metrics
Communication
Techniques
Design Principles
Research Opportunities
[26]
RF signals, LiDAR,
RGB cameras,
CSI-based sensing
Task accuracy, latency,
energy consumption
AirComp, JSCC, semantic
communication
Task-oriented ISCC,
semantic-aware
optimization
Semantic-aware FL, edge
coordination, and wireless–AI
co-design
[5]
Wearables, RF sensors,
RGB cameras, LiDAR,
ambient sensors
Energy efficiency,
inference latency,
accuracy
Gradient compression,
quantized transmission,
adaptive scheduling
Energy-first design,
model–hardware
co-optimization
Generative edge AI, neuromorphic
computing, adaptive resource
scheduling
[27]
Radar, LiDAR, RGB
cameras, GPS, IMU,
RF signals
Beam prediction,
channel estimation,
sensing accuracy
Sensor-aided beamforming,
communication-aware
sensing
Cross-modal
coordination,
ANN-enabled fusion,
data-centric design
Unified SoM framework,
multi-sensor fusion, dynamic
dataset integration
[20]
Radar, LiDAR, RF
signals, ultrasonic
sensors, RGB cameras
Sensing accuracy,
coverage, E2E latency
Passive radar
communication, cognitive
radio, full-duplex, MIMO
Functional reuse,
scalable JSAC, spectrum
efficiency
RIS-enhanced JSAC, backscatter
sensing, integrated localization
[9]
Radar, LiDAR, RGB
cameras, mobile
crowdsensing
Trade-offs among
sensing, communication,
and computation
AirComp, ISAC,
triple-functional waveforms
Integrated waveform
design, cross-layer
orchestration
ISCC in digital twins, SAGIN, and
computing networks
[28]
LiDAR, radar, RGB
cameras, wearables,
industrial and
environmental sensors
Latency, reliability,
scalability, energy
consumption
Bandwidth-aware
compression, lightweight
IoT protocols
Edge–cloud synergy,
privacy-aware
collaboration
Cross-layer scheduling,
infrastructure-free AIoT,
SAGIN-based fusion
[29]
RGB cameras, RF
signals, WSNs, mobile
sensors
Coverage ratio, QoM,
activation efficiency
Sensor scheduling, duty
cycling, cluster-based
communication
Coverage-aware
coordination, role-based
activation
Probabilistic models, adaptive
full-view coverage, sensor selection
Ours (ISEA)
Fused multi-modal
data, RGB camera,
LiDAR, mmWave and
UWB radar, event
cameras
Task-oriented metrics:
perception accuracy,
E2E inference latency
Modality-aware JSCC,
AirComp, short packet
transmission
Task-performance
co-optimization across
sensing, comm,
computation
Integration with foundation models,
low-latency ISEA, convergence of
ISEA and ISAC
other sensing modalities or AI-empowered data processing.
The integration between RF sensing, multi-modal sensing
and communication modules, named Synesthesia of Machines
(SoM), is introduced in [27], which reviews current progress
on the mapping between sensory data and channel data as
well as mutual assistance of sensing and communications.
Nevertheless, its main focus is the relationship and interaction
between RF and other sensing modalities in the coexistence of
communicational functions, not a generalized framework for
efficient sensory data processing and exchange as in ISEA.
The integration of sensing, communication and computation
(ISCC), as reviewed in [9], [26], is an emerging framework
exploiting coupling of the three operations for a wide range of
performance metrics, e.g., 6G communication rates and E2E
task latency. Compared with [9], [26], our paper focuses on
the perspective on the native integration of AI models into
sensing in edge networks oriented towards the performance
of AI-empowered sensing tasks. Our main contributions are
summarized as follows.
• We first provide technical preliminaries on ISEA from
perspectives of sensing, edge AI and new communication
techniques, and introduce the use cases and industrial and
standardization progress of ISEA. Then, we give clear
definitions of ISEA in terms of principles, metrics, trade-
offs, and architectures, highlighting the key differences
between ISEA and conventional edge AI systems.
• We provide the first comprehensive survey on how 6G
wireless communications can support ISEA, including
digital air interface for ISEA, AirComp-based air inter-
face for ISEA, and advanced signal processing for ISEA.
We focus on the adaption of a wide range of techniques,
e.g., radio resource management (RRM), access control,
and JSCC, to AI-empowered sensing tasks for optimized
E2E performance. We further review how ISEA can be
boosted by other trending advancements in 6G.
• We point out several future research directions for ISEA,
including the interplay between ISEA and foundation
models, the convergence of ISEA and ISAC, and ultra-
low-latency ISEA.
To highlight the key distinctions of ISEA from related
surveys, Table I provides a comprehensive comparison in terms
of sensing modalities, performance metrics, communication
techniques, design principles, and research opportunities.
D. Paper Organization
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We first
introduce useful preliminary knowledge for ISEA involving
sensing data acquisition, edge AI and new communication
technologies, respectively in Section II-A, Section II-B and
Section II-C. Then, in Section III, we provide case studies
for ISEA ranging from its application scenarios to supporting
techniques that fit into the ISEA paradigm, investigate the
standardization efforts for and industrial perspectives on ISEA,
and introduce available datasets. The key design principles of
ISEA are defined in Section IV-A, followed by the metrics and
tradeoffs in ISEA in Section IV-B. The general architectures
of ISEA are introduced in Section V-A, and several specific
ISEA paradigms are sketched in Section V-B. ISEA techniques
based on digital air interface are presented in Section VI,
while those based on AirComp air interfaces are presented in
Section VII. The incorporation of advanced signal processing
techniques into ISEA is introduced in Section VIII. We discuss
opportunities to boost ISEA using other trending 6G advance-
ments and review relevant works in Section IX. Outlooks
7
for research opportunities and open issues are provided in
Section X. Finally, we conclude this paper in Section XI. For
the readers’ convenience, we have included Fig. 2 to illustrate
the outline of this paper.
II. PRELIMINARIES
In this section, we provide technical preliminaries under-
pinning the establishment of ISEA. We first present several
prevalent modalities of sensing data acquisition, detailing their
principles, data types, application scenarios, etc. Then, we
introduce edge AI as the enabler for low-latency and high-
reliability sensing tasks empowered by AI models in two
aspects, i.e., edge learning and edge inference.
A. Sensing Data Acquisition
1) Camera: Camera-based visual data is arguably the most
prevalent sensing modality with a wide presence in vari-
ous devices, e.g., automated vehicles, UAVs, and robots. A
monocular RGB camera system generally comprises of a lens
and an image sensor converting light intensity at the focal
plane in different color channels into digital signals. Although
usually associated with a low cost, a monocular camera
can constantly stream high-resolution image data carrying
texture and color information. Such information is critical
for semantic-relevant sensing, including traffic-sign detection
and person re-identification [30]. However, the lack of depth
information is an inherent drawback of monocular cameras.
To resolve this issue, RGB-Depth (RGB-D) camera systems
have been developed to endow the visual data with depth
information, which can be realized by multiple techniques
with different application scenarios [31]. A classical technique
is binocular camera system with two cameras simultaneously
capturing two-dimensional (2D) images from different view
angles, which is relatively robust to ambient illumination but
incurs high computational complexity and calibration efforts
[32]. As another technique adopted by commercial products,
e.g., Kinect V1 and Apple Face ID, infrared structured light
with predefined patterns can be projected to the sensing target,
which is reflected and detected by an infrared sensor for three-
dimensional (3D) reconstruction [33]. Structured light-based
sensing provides high-resolution depth estimates and can be
operated in dark environments while being mostly limited
to indoor scenarios due to the short perception range and
strong ambient illumination interference in outdoor environ-
ments. Another key advantage of camera-based sensing is the
extremely rich library of AI models operating on image or
video data for a wide variety of downstream tasks.
2) Light Detection and Ranging: LiDAR is another preva-
lent sensing modality that exploits the reflection of emitted
lights on targets for 3D ranging and imaging. Due to the
short wavelengths of optical waves, LiDAR enjoys a high
spatial resolution, which, along with its robustness to ambient
lights, makes it a favorable choice for mission-critical or
resolution-demanding applications such as autonomous driving
and drone-based environment perception despite its relatively
high cost. For example, Google’s autonomous driving vehicle,
Waymo, features a 360-degree LiDAR as the core of its sensor
suite. DJI’s latest drone model, Matrice 300 RTK, is also
equipped with a LiDAR module for applications such as terrain
modeling and accident scene mapping. The basic architecture
of a LiDAR involves a transmitter emitting light pulses,
usually lasers, towards the target and a receiver measuring the
round-trip-delay of the reflected light, also known as time of
flight, to determine the distance to the target [34]. Resolution
and maximum sensing range are two important performance
metrics. The typical form of LiDAR output is point cloud,
which is a set of points with 3D coordinates and additional
information such as reflection intensity. State-of-the-art Li-
DARs with high spatial resolution and wide sensing range
generate point-cloud data at a data rate up to several Gbps [35],
posing significant challenges to signal processing and data
transmission among multiple agents. Traditionally, point cloud
data are processed by manual feature engineering with expert
knowledge, such as ground filtering to differentiate between
ground and non-ground points and subsequent clustering of the
latter into different objects [36]. However, with the emergence
of AI, it has become a consensus that DL-based backbones
will be fundamental in understanding LiDAR data for complex
downstream tasks such as semantic segmentation and object
detection. Celebrated DL backbones including VoxelNet [37]
and PointPillars [38], take raw point cloud data as input and
output spatial features consisting of one feature vector for each
region in the regularly spaced grid of the sensing range, known
as a voxel. The features can then be fed into a downstream
inference head for particular tasks, such as region proposal
networks for object detection. An important property of the
spatial features is its sparsity in the voxel dimension, as a
large portion of the voxels is empty, i.e., without data points,
which results in all-zero feature vectors.
3) Radio-Frequency Sensing: RF sensing refers to collect-
ing information about physical objects using RF waves. In
RF sensing, RF signals are first emitted by a transmitter,
then reflected by objects like vehicles, buildings, and peo-
ple, and eventually captured by a receiver using RADAR
technology [34], [39]. The RF signals commonly used in
RF sensing are composed of frequency-modulated continuous
wave (FMCW), wireless fidelity (Wi-Fi), and ultra-wideband
(UWB) signals. Specifically, FMCW radar is shown to be
efficient and accurate in estimating the range, velocity, and
angle information [40]. UWB Doppler radars are powerful in
capturing vital signs of the human body, such as heart rate
and respiration signals [41]. According to transmitter/receiver
positions, RF sensing can be categorized into 1) passive
sensing—the transmitter and receiver are located at different
positions 2) and active sensing—the transmitter is the same as
the receiver. Compared to light-based sensing, RF sensing can
realize stable and low-cost identification and classification in
non-line-of-sight (non-LoS) scenarios [42]. At the same time,
the broadcasting property of radio signal transmission enables
RF-sensing to simultaneously monitor multiple objects and
record changes in a vast region. To this end, raw sensory data
need to be processed to generate informative knowledge about
objects. In this class, low-level features such as speeds, range,
and angles can be efficiently extracted by using analytical
methods including principal component analysis (PCA) and
8
Section I: Introduction
I.A Milestones of ISEA
Milestones of Communications
Milestones of Sensing
Milestones of AI
I.B Evolving towards ISEA
Section II: Preliminaries
II.A Sensing Data Acquisition
Camera
RF Sensing
Multi-Modal Sensing
LiDAR
Event Data
II.B Edge AI
Edge Learning
Edge Inference
Section III: Case Studies, Industrial and Standardisation Progress
III.A Case Studies — Application Scenarios
Autonomous Driving
Smart City
Robotics Planning & Control
Healthcare
IoT Digital Twin
III.B Case Studies — Supporting Techniques
Positioning and 
Tracking
SAGIN
Human-Machine Symbiosis
Generative AI
III.D Standardization Efforts, 
Industrial Perspectives, and 
Datasets
Section IV: Design Principles of ISEA
IV.A The Design Principles
Modality-Aware Data Communications
Integrated Communication-Computing Design
Task-Oriented Optimization
IV.B Metrics and Tradeoffs
Sensing Metrics
Computation Metrics
Communication Metrics
Tradeoffs
Section V: Architectures of ISEA
V.A Architectures
Key Components
Computing Pipeline and AI Backbones
Communication Interface
V.B Paradigms
AI-on-Sensor ISEA
Split ISEA
Hierarchical ISEA
Cooperative ISEA
AI-on-Server ISEA
Section VI: Digital Air Interface for ISEA
VI.A Joint Source-Channel Coding
VI.B Access Control
VI.C Radio Resource Management
Section VII: AirComp-based Air Interface for ISEA
VII.A Signal Processing in AirComp-based ISEA
VII.B Radio Resource Management
VII.C Practical AirComp
Section VIII: Advanced Signal 
Processing for ISEA
VIII.A On-the-Fly Computing and Communication
VIII.B ISEA with Multi-Functional Waveforms
VIII.C Privacy-Preserving Signal Processing in ISEA
Section X: Research Opportunities  and Open Issues
X.A ISEA Meets Foundation Models
X.B Convergence of ISEA and ISAC
X.C Ultra-Low-Latency ISEA
Section XI: Concluding Remarks
Background of ISEA
Overview of ISEA
ISEA Techniques
Outlooks
II.C New Communication 
Technologies in ISEA
Joint Source-Channel Coding
Over-the-Air Computation
Section IX: ISEA with Other Trending 
Advancements in 6G
IX.A ISEA with Advanced Physical-Layer Techniques
IX.B Space-Ground Empowered ISEA
IX.C ISEA with Advanced Networking
I.C Comparisons and 
Contributions
I.D Paper Organization
X.D Practical Challenges in ISEA
III.E Lessons Learned
IV.C Lessons Learned
V.C Lessons Learned
III.C Limitations of 5G Connectivity-
Centric Approaches
Fig. 2. The outline of this survey. We first provide background information on the motivation, technical preliminaries and usage scenarios of ISEA, followed
by an overview defining the design principles and architecture of ISEA. A comprehensive review of ISEA techniques is then presented, followed by future
outlooks.
9
LiDAR
Camera
Event 
Camera
Sensing Fusion 
via D2D Links
Multi-Modality Fusion 
via Mobile Cellular Links
RF Sensing
Fig. 3. In an urban traffic scenario, multiple sensing modalities are installed,
including RGB cameras, LiDARs, event cameras and radars. Multi-modal
sensory fusion is achieved via device-to-device (D2D) and mobile cellular
links such that each participant has a holistic view of all vehicles and
pedestrians.
ambiguity analysis [43]. Currently, extensive efforts are also
made to leverage advanced DL methods to facilitate com-
plicated RF-sensing applications. Exemplified by DL-based
human activity identification, range-Doppler maps, micro-
Doppler spectrograms (mDS), and spectrogram envelopes can
be first extracted from raw RF data and are then fed into a
bidirectional long short-term memory (LSTM) recurrent neural
network to make classification decision [44], [45].
In 5G and beyond, RF-sensing and radar technologies are
expected to be fully integrated within communication systems,
termed ISAC. ISAC is deemed useful for improving utilization
efficiency and reducing implementation costs, being adopted
as a key technology in 6G [46]. It introduces new research
opportunities for RF-sensing from three aspects: realizing
communication by pure radar signals, executing sensing via
communication signals, and dual-functional waveform design.
The coexistence between radar and communication systems
spreads over the spectrum from 1 GHz to 300 GHz and diverse
architectures including MIMO radar, Orthogonal Frequency-
Division Multiplexing (OFDM) systems, and mmWave com-
munications.
4) Event Data: Different from traditional frame-based cam-
eras, which capture images by continuously sampling the scene
at a fixed rate and storing the entire frame as a grid of
pixels, event-based cameras capture and report the changes
in light intensity at the pixel level in real-time. Specifically,
the pixels in event-based cameras operate independently and
asynchronously. Each pixel continuously monitors the light
intensity changes at its location and generates an event when
the intensity crosses a certain threshold. The event consists
of the originating pixel’s coordinates, timestamp, and polarity,
indicating the trend of intensity, i.e., increasing or decreasing.
These components form a stream of event data that represents
the visual information captured, which can be transmitted,
processed, and analyzed to extract valuable insights or perform
specific computer vision tasks, e.g., object tracking and optical
flow estimation. It is emphasized that event data is highly
sparse compared with the aforementioned frame-based video
data since the event-based camera produces data at a much
lower rate. The sparse nature contributes to its advantages of
low power consumption, high temporal resolution, and high
Information 
loss
Computation 
load on sensors
Communication 
overhead
Suitable 
modalities
Early fusion
Intermediate fusion
Late fusion
Methods
• Raw data fusion 
• BEV transformation
• Feature view-pooling 
• Attentive fusion 
• Multi-modal tokenizer
• Majority voting 
• Belief summation
Fusion of closely coupled 
data sources, such as RF and 
lidar
High, due to inference 
with a full model
Applicable to the widest 
range of modalities
Each modality shall have 
sufficient information for 
independent prediction
High, due to the transmission 
of high-dimensional raw data
Moderate, due to compressed 
intermediate features
Low, as only the final 
output is transmitted
Moderate, due to the need of 
neural-network feature 
extractor
Low, comprising mainly 
noise reduction, 
normalization and projection
High, due to separate full 
inference on each sensor
Moderate, due to the need of 
neural-network feature 
extractor
Low, as the raw data are 
preserved
Fig. 4. Different data fusion strategies with tradeoffs in versatility, commu-
nication overhead, computation workload, and information loss [53]–[55].
dynamic range, which benefits its processing in the considered
next-generation wireless communication system as well [47].
The sparsity nature of event data can be utilized to compress
data size for low-cost communication.
5) Multi-Modal Sensing: Multi-modal sensing is motivated
by the fact that the above three sensing modalities have
their advantages and inherent limitations, respectively. For
example, LiDAR and RF sensing both provide precise 3D
spatial information while lacking the rich semantic information
(e.g., color and texture) provided by camera images. Exploiting
complementary sensing features in multiple modalities is thus
expected to boost sensing performance. Sensors with multiple
modalities can co-exist on a single device, such as autonomous
vehicles equipped with both LiDAR and cameras, where multi-
modal fusion can be executed on board without incurring extra
communication costs. In a more general scenario, sensors with
different modalities are distributed to multiple devices in the
network. For example, in an edge robotics system, the robots
are equipped with LiDAR and a camera, while the BS is
equipped with ISAC hardware that provides the RF-sensing
modality. In this case, the communication cost is a critical
aspect in designing the fusion strategy.
A rich literature exists on sensing models that exploit
multiple sensing modalities to complete a downstream task.
The fusion of LiDAR and camera image is arguably the most
prevalent fusion strategy applied for various tasks including
object detection, tracking, and semantic segmentation [48]–
[51]. The authors of [52] complement LiDAR with RF sensing
to improve the detection performance. Depending on the
model architecture design, the fusion methods can happen
at different stages, e.g., early fusion at the raw-data level,
intermediate fusion at the feature level, and late fusion at
the decision level. Generally, modality fusion at higher levels
results in a smaller communication volume for information
exchange between sensors, while the information loss may
increase due to the reduced data dimension. Detailed descrip-
tions of these fusion methods and tradeoffs are shown in Fig. 4.
B. Edge AI
1) Edge Learning: Extensive studies have demonstrated
the effectiveness of machine-learning algorithms in distilling
10
knowledge from raw sensory data to support downstream
sensing tasks like classification, semantic segmentation, and
3D stereo. In practice, however, the enormous sensory datasets
are collected by edge IoT devices such as cameras, radars,
and diverse sensors. Centralizing these local data at a cloud
center for AI training and data analysis is undesirable due
to the resultant privacy constraints and communication bottle-
necks [56]. To tackle this issue, leveraging learning algorithms
at the network edge to distill intelligence in a distributed
manner to avoid direct transmission of raw data has emerged
as a promising approach [56], [57]. In this respect, federated
learning (FL) has gained significant traction [58]–[60]. FL
builds upon the iterative stochastic-gradient descent (SGD)
algorithm and involves three main operations: 1) local sensors
train a local model using their data via SGD, 2) local sensors
upload these intermediate results (e.g., gradients and network
weights) over wireless links, and 3) a central server aggregates
local results to update a global model and broadcasts the
latest updates to local sensors. These operations iterate until
convergence. FL methods have been well investigated in
wireless systems by utilizing diverse air interface techniques,
such as AirComp and broadband transmission [60]. However,
empowering sensing with edge learning methods encounters
several challenges that may not be adequately addressed by
conventional algorithms. First of all, the presence of data
and model heterogeneity across different sensors presents
both opportunities and challenges for integrating sensing and
edge AI. Consider a multi-view sensing scenario. Even when
observing the same target, the variations in sensor spatial
locations and hardware settings (e.g., RGB and depth cameras)
naturally introduce non-identically distributed (Non-IID) prop-
erties and distinct representations to on-device data. Although
the data inconsistency enables the trained models to acquire
information from different domains by multi-view or multi-
modal fusion to improve sensing performance, it also requires
the design of edge learning algorithms considering more
complicated operations including feature pooling, attention-
based fusion, and spatial alignment [61].
2) Edge Inference: Whilst edge learning aims at distill-
ing intelligence from data collected by edge devices, edge
inference focuses on the efficient provision of well-trained
AI models as services to heterogeneous edge devices under
possibly stringent latency and reliability requirements. In
contrast to the conventional cloud inference which places
the intensive computation load of AI model inference at the
central cloud, edge inference deploys computation resources
on edge nodes in proximity to the device requesting service,
thus promising lower round-trip latency and avoiding traffic
jams in the backbone network. These advantages render edge
inference as a key enabling technology for sensing with
latency-demanding and mission-critical natures. Depending on
the deployment of the model computation load, edge inference
can be categorized into on-device inference, on-server infer-
ence, split inference, and distributed inference. On-device and
on-server inference places model computation solely on end
devices or servers, aiming at scenarios with extremely scarce
communication resources or low-end on-device computation
capabilities, respectively. Split inference is arguably the most
prevalent approach where the AI model is split into a low-
complexity device sub-model and a server sub-model due to
its privacy-preserving nature and high flexibility. The device
uses its sub-model to extract features from the raw data, which
are uploaded to the server for further inference with the server
sub-model. Therein, the feature uploading phase is often con-
fronted with a communication bottleneck since the extracted
features may have a higher dimension than raw data, especially
when handling bursting arrivals of inference requests from
multiple users. A set of techniques have been developed for
split inference to boost its efficiency under QoS requirements,
including communication and computation resource allocation
[62], [63], feature compression/pruning [64], [65], JSCC [66],
progressive transmission [67], early exiting [68], [69], batch
processing [70], [71], and model partitioning point selection
[72]. Different from previous paradigms involving a device-
server pair, distributed inference involves the distribution of
computation load onto multiple edge devices to complete a
single inference request [73], [74], which usually requires the
partition of an AI model into multiple independent execution
units for distributed computing.
C. New Communication Technologies in ISEA
The traditional design paradigm is based on the separation
of source and channel coding, where the former handles data
compression and the latter aims at errorless bit transmission
over the air interface. However, this paradigm becomes sub-
optimal as ISEA shifts the focus of communication from
achieving high rates to attaining high performance for par-
ticular tasks with a low E2E latency, necessitating the incor-
poration of new communication technologies. Next, we intro-
duce two representative communication technologies, which,
in a general sense, target point-to-point and multiple access
scenarios, respectively.
1) Joint Source-Channel Coding: JSCC aims to push the
limits of separated source-channel coding, overcoming its
drawbacks, e.g., cliff effect, in various 6G scenarios, includ-
ing the ultra-low-latency regime, AI training/inference with
E2E performance requirements, and knowledge base-enabled
communications [75]. Despite its recent revival, JSCC is a
long-running research topic, but classical techniques primarily
focused on statistical source distributions and joint tuning and
decoding of separately designed source and channel codes.
The emerging DL-empowered JSCC comprises an encoder
that realizes the mapping from source to channel inputs and
a decoder that takes in the channel inputs for information
reconstruction for downstream tasks, while both are param-
eterized by neural networks [76]. Such a design enables E2E
training of the JSCC framework towards maximizing a desired
target over training dataset, where channels are considered as a
frozen intermediate layer as opposed to the trainable encoder-
decoder pair. Examples of E2E optimization targets include
peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) for images and multi-scale
structural similarity index measures for videos. Advanced DL-
based JSCC techniques involve adaptive rate control, finite-
constellation implementations, etc. In ISEA systems, the de-
sign goal of JSCC shall go beyond the level of data/semantic
11
reconstruction towards the effectiveness level, aiming at op-
timized downstream task performance. For example, the E2E
communication of point-cloud features shall be optimized such
that the downstream object detection model yields the highest
precision instead of the feature reconstruction error.
2) Over-the-Air Computation:
Over-the-air computation
(AirComp) leverages the waveform superposition property of
wireless multi-access channels to realize the desired aggrega-
tion function of distributed data by simultaneous transmissions
[77]. Compared to orthogonal access where the communica-
tion latency grows with the number of devices, AirComp’s
latency scales by O(1) w.r.t. the number of devices due to si-
multaneous access, rendering it a promising solution for ISEA
applications that often require low-latency data aggregation
from many devices. The general architecture of AirComp is
illustrated in Fig. 7 (a). The typical procedure of AirComp can
be elaborated by considering the scenario of value averaging
where both devices and the server are equipped with a single
antenna. First, aiming for analog wireless transmissions, each
device normalizes its data into a zero-mean distribution, and
then modulates the normalized values onto the magnitude
of transmission symbols. Then, zero-forcing transmitter is
applied at each device based on its transmit channel state infor-
mation (CSI) to pre-compensate channel fading [78], which is
also known as magnitude alignment. Subsequently, the devices
transmit simultaneously with symbol-level synchronization by
e.g., time-advance techniques in 4G/5G standards such that the
signal magnitudes sum up in the air. The server then receives
and scales the aggregated signal to recover the averaged data.
Beyond realizing data averaging, AirComp supports the
computation of a family of aggregation functions, known as
nomographic functions, by adding due data pre-processing
and post-processing at the device and server respectively.
These functions include, for example, multiplication, geo-
metric mean, and vector norms. Moreover, AirComp can
be implemented in multi-antenna systems, e.g., single-input-
multiple-output (SIMO) [79] and MIMO [78]), further ex-
ploiting channel diversity to multiplex aggregations or reduce
errors.
III. CASE STUDIES, INDUSTRIAL AND STANDARDIZATION
PROGRESS
In this section, we conduct use case studies for ISEA,
first introducing 6G application scenarios enabled by ISEA
infrastructure and then several key supporting techniques for
these scenarios as functions of ISEA. Next, we summarize
the standardization efforts, industrial perspectives and datasets
regarding ISEA development.
A. Case Studies – Application Scenarios
1) Autonomous Driving: Undoubtedly, the evolving capa-
bilities of sensing and AI will play an indispensable role in
next-level autonomous driving, which requires the vehicle to
perceive the environment, analyze sensory data, and make
decisions in a real-time, intelligent, and reliable manner. On
the one hand, each vehicle itself is equipped with moderate-
scale AI models to fuse and understand multi-modal sensory
data, supporting subsequent decision-making. This technique
is known as single-vehicle intelligence. On the other hand,
vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) and vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I)
cooperation is envisioned to solve several critical challenges
including object occlusion, extreme weather, contesting, etc.
A typical scenario of V2V collaboration involves multiple ve-
hicles communicating over wireless links to exchange sensory
information in a shared feature space, e.g., bird’s-eye view
space, to detect occluded vehicles. V2I generally involves a
roadside server assisting vehicles with localization, percep-
tion, and coordinated decision-making. ISEA in cooperative
autonomous driving aims to achieve integrated sensing and
networking of intelligent vehicles and servers under stringent
latency, reliability, and E2E accuracy demands by orchestrat-
ing AI computation and sensory data communications.
2) Robotics Planning and Control: State-of-the-art robotics
relies heavily on AI models to understand human languages,
perceive the environment, make decisions, and interact with
the environment and user [80]. Specifically, natural-language
instruction is transferred by language models into semantic
representations of the physical world. Meanwhile, sensory
data captured by various sensors such as cameras, RGB-D
sensors, and range sensors are analyzed by sensing models
to create a high-dimensional feature space that encodes the
objects and environments perceived by a robot. By projecting
the instruction semantics into the sensory space, the robot
can associate certain perceived patterns with the instruction
and control its actuators to accomplish the task. The heavy
computational load of large language and sensing models
renders pure on-robot model deployment infeasible under
battery life constraints. Thus, robotic task accomplishment
frequently involves sending sensory data and input prompts
to edge servers in proximity to robots for low-latency remote
execution. Beyond the single-robot workflow, another emerg-
ing paradigm is multi-robot collaboration via edge servers for
localization and perception, where each robot sends sensory
data generated from LiDAR, cameras, inertial measurement
unit (IMU), etc., to the edge server for fusion into holistic
perception results.
3) Internet-of-Things Digital Twin: Digital twin involves
creating a software replica of a real-world entity for testing,
monitoring, and behavior prediction. Some typical scenar-
ios include virtual sensors for industrial production, digital
patients for health monitoring, and digital city. The digital
replica will be created from real-time data collected by IoT
sensors. Meanwhile, the critical role of AI models has become
a consensus in various aspects of digital twins, e.g., virtu-
alization models for mirroring sensory observation to virtual
representation and analytics models for calculating physical
motion and predicting future behavior [81]. However, digital
twin is challenged by the computation-intensive nature of such
models and low latency required by real-time data analytics,
for which ISEA can be a promising solution by offloading
sensory data to the edge cloud for real-time processing.
4) Smart City: Enabled by massive IoT sensors and AI-
based intelligent systems, smart city is envisioned as the solu-
tion to many urban challenges [82]. For example, the concept
of “City Brain” [83] is reshaping city management through
12
streamlined sensing, data analytics, and decision making. With
the development of inter-domain data sharing and multi-modal
data fusion, City Brain is evolving from local intelligence to
a general intelligent engine for use cases ranging from traffic
control to emergency response to city planning. It relies on
edge AI for real-time intelligent analytics of sensory data
collected by millions of sensors deployed in smart cities, such
as visual cameras, thermal cameras, wearable devices, etc., and
subsequent decision-making. With C2 integration and cross-
layer synergy, ISEA provides the infrastructure for efficient
selection, transmission, and analytics of a massive amount of
sensory data in fast response time as typically required by
smart city applications. For example, assisted by on-sensor AI
models, the transmission of sensory data to the edge server
is triggered with importance awareness such that emergency
events are reliably detected with minimal network traffic.
5) Healthcare: Smart healthcare is empowered by data
from a variety of sensors ranging from wearable devices to
patient monitors to surveillance cameras, which are widely
deployed in hospitals, homes, and elderly communities [84].
The collected data, typical in multiple modalities, are ana-
lyzed via AI models to monitor health conditions, recognize
human gestures, respond to emergencies, and combat epidemic
outbreaks [85]. The privacy sensitiveness of medical data,
extensive bandwidth costs, and stringent latency constraints
require the AI model computation to be deployed on edge
servers instead of remote cloud centers. ISEA provides a
versatile framework for aggregating and analyzing multi-
modal data from healthcare sensors with highly heterogeneous
communication and computation capabilities.
B. Case Studies – Supporting Techniques
1) Positioning and Tracking: The fields of positioning
and object tracking feature a rich set of technologies that
collectively enable precise localization and continuous mon-
itoring of objects with high accuracy, high reliability, and
low latency. Advanced positioning systems include satellite-
based systems like GPS and BeiDou for global navigation [86]
and terrestrial technologies like radio frequency identification
(RFID), Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE), and (UWB) for in-
door positioning and tracking [41], [87]. AI-based positioning
and tracking are increasingly employed in applications with
complex environments, multi-modal data (e.g., the fusion of
visual information and LiDAR [88]–[91]) and high-precision
requirements like UAV swarms and autonomous driving [92],
[93]. ISEA is deemed a promising framework contributing
to real-time intelligent positioning and tracking by offering
low-latency access to edge AI resources and support for
cooperation between devices.
2) Generative AI: Generative AI is expected to be native
in 6G mobile networks for automating a broad range of tasks
in mobile applications including human semantic communica-
tions, personal assistants, auto-pilot, and robotic control. The
ability of generative AI to comprehend and respond to nuanced
inputs makes it a powerful tool for ISEA, supporting sensory
data processing and automating ISEA operations. First, with
its general intelligence capabilities, generative models can
support versatile sensory data understanding and decision-
making, adapting to new tasks in few-shot and zero-shot
cases. Second, generative AI holds the potential to realize
automated ISEA operations, e.g., dynamic scheduling and
sensor access control adaptive to the system status. For ex-
ample, in a mobile network, multiple sensors need to access a
server for cooperative field perception and multi-modal fusion.
Generative AI, aided with chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting
and multi-modal adaptors, can analyze network status and
patterns in multi-sensor observations to provide predictive
modeling and real-time actuation for content-driven resource
allocation and energy management among sensor devices. In
addition, the development of generative AI is expected to
benefit from access to a huge number of sensing datasets.
Further, personalized sensory data allows for task-oriented
fine-tuning of a general large language model, making it more
efficient in specific application scenarios. The process of data
provisioning and training shall be supported by ISEA with
techniques such as device-edge cooperative fine-tuning.
3) Satellite-Air-Ground Integrated Network (SAGIN): SA-
GIN features the integration of satellite systems, aerial net-
works, and terrestrial communications, targeting large cover-
age and strong resilience [94]. The majority of research efforts
focus on the cooperative execution between heterogeneous
systems in SAGIN, which includes both joint network design
and protocol optimization [95]. On the other hand, lifting
AI above the ground is becoming attractive for supporting
applications requiring expansive field perception and intelli-
gent task execution, such as intelligent transportation systems,
military missions, and disaster rescue [96]. This leads to a
natural fusion between ISEA and SAGIN. In this case, due
to the distinct levels of coverage (and thus the available
sensing range) offered by different components in SAGIN, the
architecture of ISEA is reshaped into a hierarchical one that
consists of three levels: 1) edge devices/servers (e.g., sensors,
smart devices, and edge servers) serve as the edge for ground
systems, 2) UAVs form the edge for air-ground systems, and
3) satellites act as the edge for space systems. Simultaneously,
the components of AI models will be employed at different
levels of the network edge to execute their corresponding
functionalities (e.g. compression, feature extraction, fusion,
and prediction) according to the task requirements and re-
source availability. Despite the flexibility achieved by SA-
GIN resilience, heterogeneity exists in both sensory datasets,
computation capability, and data rate, which poses several
challenges to the materialization of ISEA in SAGIN.
4) Human-Machine Symbiosis: Advanced sensor technolo-
gies, such as IoT devices, wearable sensors, and smart en-
vironments, enable a seamless flow of data between humans
and machines. These techniques, coupled with AI-based data
analytics, offer personalized and responsive interactions for
cooperative interaction and close coupling between humans
and machines [23], known as human-machine symbiosis.
Several practical examples illustrate how AI-sensing integrated
techniques are intricately woven into various facets of our
lives, enriching human experiences and decision-making. For
instance, leveraging sensory data (e.g., based on motion and
temperature sensors, thermostats, cameras, or wireless sens-
13
ing) within smart homes enables automation based on the
recognition of human behavior (e.g., voice and gestures),
adjusting the environment according to occupants’ preferences
and optimizing energy efficiency and comfort [23]. ISEA,
propelled by and designed for low-latency intelligent sensory
data analytics, can serve as a powerful platform for collectively
implementing sensing techniques and AI to offer real-time
human-machine symbiosis services.
C. Limitations of 5G Connectivity-Centric Approaches
The conventional 5G New Radio (NR) architecture, while
optimized for high-throughput communication, exhibits fun-
damental inefficiencies when applied to integrated sensing, AI
computation, and communication. These limitations stem from
three key aspects:
• Functional isolation: 5G NR employs distinct waveform
designs for communication (e.g., OFDM) and sensing
(e.g., sparse reference signals), leading to: 1) Resource
inefficiency: Redundant pilot transmissions for channel
estimation (communication) and radar-like sensing re-
sult in extra overhead in joint positioning and tracking
scenarios; 2) Latency bottlenecks: AI-driven applications
(e.g., generative AI) require real-time sensor-data fusion,
yet 5G’s sequential processing (sense →transmit →
compute) introduces prohibitive delays for time-sensitive
inference tasks.
• Rigid resource allocation: 5G’s slot-based scheduling
lacks the agility to dynamically optimize: 1) Time-
frequency resources for ultra-low-latency tracking (e.g.,
µs-level updates in drone swarms); 2) Computing-aware
transmission for distributed AI workloads (e.g., split
inference across devices and edge servers).
• Semantic-agnostic operation: Current protocols lack na-
tive support for: 1) Task-oriented QoS metrics: Tradi-
tional bit-error-rate (BER) optimizations do not align with
perceptual quality in generative AI or sensing accuracy in
SLAM applications; 2) Cross-domain tradeoffs: Indepen-
dent optimization of communication capacity and sensing
resolution (Cram´er-Rao bound) leads to suboptimal per-
formance in integrated networks.
D. Standardization
Efforts,
Industrial
Perspective,
and
Datasets
1) Standardization Efforts: Substantial efforts are made by
international standardization organizations like ITU, IEEE,
and 3GPP, to promote the development of ISEA-involved
specifications. To be specific, the ITU’s Telecommunication
sector (ITU-R) recommended two new usage scenarios in June
2023 for 6G, namely IAAC and ISAC, and initially offered
a roadmap for technology/standard development in its report
ITU-R M.2516. Other ITU sectors like ITU’s Telecommunica-
tion standardization sector (ITU-T) have also developed a set
of recommendations including ITU-T Y.4207, Y.4213, Y.4216,
Y.4420, and X.1363 to describe and initialize requirements,
capabilities, and frameworks of IoT sensing within different
scenarios. At the same time, IEEE has several existing sensing-
related standard activities like Sensor Performance and Quality
and Smart Manufacturing and Smart Factories, where IEEE
2700 and P2806 propose a framework for sensor performance
specification terminology and digital representation of physical
objects, respectively. IEEE also emphasizes specific endeavors
related to sensor interfaces for cyber-physical systems within
its IEEE 2888 standards family. These initiatives encompass
defining sensor interfaces for both the cyber and physical
realms, establishing standards for actuator interfaces, and coor-
dinating digital synchronization between the cyber and physi-
cal domains. In the technical reports released by 3GPP, such as
3GPP TR 23.700-80 and 3GPP TR 22.874, ISEA is introduced
as a vital component associated with specific performance
requirements for different 5G assistance applications, includ-
ing FL, robotic control, and automotive networks. Moreover,
there exist other important standardization activities and events
that will provide key functional components and technical
guidance for ISEA. For example, the Internet Engineering Task
Force (IETF) is looking at a data format to represent sensor
measurements based on its packet transmission protocol RFC
7428. A project initialized by the International Electrotechnical
Commission (IEC), called PWI TR JTC1-SC41, is developing
several components of the correspondence measure in digital
twins such as similarity, resolution, latency, level of detail,
which can be considered as performance metrics in ISEA.
2) Industrial Perspective: The telecommunications industry
widely recognizes sensing and edge AI as key functions
of 6G networks and invests consistent efforts for their ma-
terialization. For edge AI, Qualcomm envisions connected
edge intelligence with sensor fusion and edge analytics to
enable ultra-low latency and privacy-preserving services [97].
As concrete progress, it has released several models of
edge AI stations, named Edge AI Boxes, with dedicated
chips integrating wireless communication modules and AI
accelerators. These products target various use cases, such
as surveillance cameras, smart manufacturing, smart cities,
and autonomous driving, which require real-time analytics of
massive sensing data. Huawei has also rolled out Atlas 500
AI Edge Station designed for edge applications. The leading
semiconductor companies are increasing their focus on edge
AI and sensing chipsets, including the NVIDIA Jetson series
and the Intel Movidius vision processing units, to realize AI
computing on edge servers/devices for intelligent sensors, like
smart cameras. In the automotive industry, it has become a
consensus that sensors distributed on multiple vehicles and
infrastructure units should be connected and cooperate for
improved situation awareness (see, e.g., the standards J3216
of SAE International). Leading companies in the auto-driving
industry, e.g., Volkswagen, Huawei, and BYD, are interested in
cooperative sensing enabling techniques ranging from sensor
fusion to V2V and V2I data communications [98]. AI models
powered by multi-source data and real-time edge computing
are expected to enhance autonomous driving capabilities sig-
nificantly.
3) Datasets: As AI-empowered sensing draws growing
attention, abundant datasets are available for benchmarking
the E2E performance of ISEA protocols and control algo-
rithms on various tasks with different modalities. For object
detection tasks, KITTI dataset [99] provides real-world visual,
14
LiDAR, and GPS/IMU data recorded by sensors installed
on a test vehicle while providing object annotations. For
cooperative sensing between vehicles, OPV2V [100] features
sensing data simultaneously collected from multiple vehicles
while providing similar sensing modalities as KITTI, and is
thus suitable for testing the impact of feature fusion, sensor
selection and multi-access on detection accuracy. For multi-
sensor object recognition tasks, the ModelNet10 [101] and
ShapeNetCore [102] datasets provide accurate 3D models for
object samples divided into 10 and 12 classes, respectively. For
each object sample, multiple 2D images from various angles
can be rendered to be used as captured images by sensors.
Beyond traditional sensing modalities, several event camera-
based datasets are available, e.g., MVSEV [103] and M3ED
[104], both providing real-world event camera data captured
by multiple devices ranging from ground vehicles to UAVs.
The types of ground-truth data include reference poses, depth
image, point clouds, semantic segmentations, etc., enabling
benchmarking a variety of cooperative sensing tasks such as
video reconstruction, activity detection, and semantic segmen-
tation. While the abovementioned datasets focus on sensory
data and do not contain wireless channel measurements, most
provide sufficient information of the propagation environment,
e.g., scatterers and propagation distance, to model channels
between user devices and edge servers.
E. Lessons Learned
• A wide variety of emerging 6G applications and tech-
niques requires intelligent perception for environment
awareness, semantic understanding, and rapid response.
Their real-time and mission-critical nature results in
unprecedented QoS requirements, including millisecond-
level communication-and-computation latency, ultra-high
reliability in E2E task performance, and scalability to
thousands of cooperating devices [105].
• These requirements cannot be satisfied with existing 5G
networks, which focuses on creating high-throughput bit
pipes but are suboptimal in E2E task metrics.
• ISEA, on the contrary, provides a versatile framework
for intelligent perception provisioning in edge networks
with E2E optimality. Standardization organization and
industry leaders have recognized the potential of ISEA
and initiated projects and prototypes that pave the way
for real-world implementations of ISEA [97], [98]. Fur-
thermore, a variety of datasets [99]–[104] have been
made available to simulate multi-modal sensing data
acquisition, mobility, and wireless propagation in real-
world environments, facilitating benchmarking of ISEA
performance. These insights indicate that ISEA represents
a promising research direction in the context of 6G
technologies.
IV. DESIGN PRINCIPLES OF ISEA
The existing communication system, which is intrinsically
modular and rate-oriented, is insufficient for meeting the
demanding QoS requirements of emerging AI-empowered
sensing applications in terms of, e.g., accuracy, reliability,
and latency, calling for the integration of sensing and edge
AI. In this section, we first sketch the design principles
of ISEA with a detailed breakdown into three key aspects.
We further present the task-oriented metrics from sensing,
communications, and computing perspectives, followed by a
discussion on the fundamental tradeoffs in ISEA.
A. The Design Principles
ISEA aims to integrate sensing, AI, and communications to
achieve optimized task performance. The general principle of
ISEA design is to process and transmit task-relevant sensory
information for various applications with improved accuracy,
latency, and energy efficiency. It aligns with not only task-
oriented communications of 6G but also the design principle
of E2E perception applications. In the sequel, we break down
the general principle into several key aspects that distinguish
ISEA from conventional rate-oriented mobile communication
systems and other emerging paradigms such as semantic
communications and ISAC.
1) Modality-Aware Data Communications: The conven-
tional digital mobile networks designed under the rate-
maximization design principle aim at transmitting each data bit
without awareness of data content. However, the ultimate goal
of ISEA is to efficiently convey sensory information, which,
as a consequence, shall be designed in light of the modality,
embedded semantics, and inherent characteristics of sensory
data. Specifically, ISEA is envisioned to convey the critical
semantics in sensory data for higher communication efficiency,
which can be achieved by techniques such as projection
onto a global Bird’s-eye-view (BEV) coordinate with lower
dimensions, shared knowledge base between transmitter and
receiver (e.g., known information of the sensing environment),
and AI-based cross-layer coding design. For example, for an
event detection task with millions of urban sensors, ISEA
protocols shall be tailored to exploit its time-domain data
traffic to balance efficiency and reliability, where sensing data
is typically sporadic but can surge if an event is detected. Also,
certain sensing features, e.g., voxel features, show structured
sparsity in dimensions with real-world correspondence, which
can be adjusted adaptively to reduce the communication cost
by orders of magnitude.
2) Integrated Communication-Computing Design: Conven-
tional mobile networks generally adopt a communication-
computing separated design paradigm, being agnostic of the
downstream AI models. On the contrary, ISEA adopts an
integrated communication-computing approach by designing
transmission protocols and optimizing resource allocation for
AI-empowered sensing models, evolving from MEC that as-
sumes generic computation models. An important theme of
ISEA is thus designing communications to accommodate the
need for sensing AI model computation. For example, the
general-purpose backbone model for sensory data analytics
for various downstream tasks, usually computationally inten-
sive, can be accelerated by parallel processing of a batch
of sensory data from multiple devices, requiring dedicated
design of caching protocols and resource allocation. Also,
certain characteristics of sensing AI model computation can
15
be leveraged, and some components can be integrated with
communication modules to boost the system efficiency, e.g.,
exploiting the inherent robustness of AI models for data com-
pression, unequal feature protection, joint design of transceiver
and feature coding, and over-the-air sensory data fusion.
3) Task-Oriented Optimization: The ultimate goal of ISEA
design and optimization is to maximize the sensing task perfor-
mance, as elaborated in the following subsection. Achieving
this requires E2E system optimization crossing the physical
and application layers under sensing QoS constraints. While
conventional metrics of communication systems, e.g., latency,
can still serve as useful tools, their relationships with the
downstream task performance shall be re-established in the
sensing context. A notable example is accelerating model
training/inference in the presence of channel noise to max-
imize the detection accuracy, e.g., classification accuracy or
intersection over Unions (IoUs), on collected sensory data.
B. Metrics and Tradeoffs
The development of ISEA relies on cross-disciplinary archi-
tecture designs that involve the concepts of sensing, communi-
cation, and computing. Consequently, the ISEA performance
can be comprehensively characterized from these three aspects
with the metrics introduced below.
1) Sensing Metrics: Hierarchical performance evaluation
can be utilized in ISEA, which involves task-level accuracy,
estimation error, range and resolution, and timeliness, as
elaborated below.
• Accuracy/uncertainty:
Downstream
sensing
tasks
largely encompass target classification, detection, and
semantic
segmentation.
The
primary
performance
metric in this domain is accuracy, which quantifies the
probability of correct classification or the probability
of
error
in hypothesis
testing. In
ISEA,
accuracy
consistently serves as the key objective function for
optimizing E2E algorithms and framework designs.
Moreover, a strong duality exists between accuracy
and inference uncertainty, which is defined as the
entropy of posteriors of classification classes given
observations [67], [106]. The good analytical properties
of inference uncertainty make it an alternative for sensing
performance evaluation in both theoretical analysis and
engineering practice.
• Estimation error: Parameter estimation and scene re-
construction play an important role in supporting sensing
applications. The resulting performance in these scenarios
can be evaluated by quantifying the gap between the
estimated results and their ground truth into the metrics of
mean square error (MSE), ambiguity functions, dissim-
ilarity (e.g., Hausdorff distance), and mean intersection
over union (mIoU). These metrics have been widely used
in sensing waveform design (e.g., the dual-functional
waveform design in ISEA), data fusion strategy, and point
cloud processing. It has also been shown that estimation
error can be connected to accuracy according to the
concepts of classification margin and perturbation theory.
Additionally, estimation error can be described through
information metrics for sensing tasks with generative
modeling, such as the generative point cloud learning in
multi-robot field perception.
• Coverage and Resolution: The sensing coverage is
defined as the union of reliable sensing range by each
connected sensing node. It is jointly determined by net-
work connectivity, capabilities and allocated resources of
sensors, and occlusions. Resolution, on the other hand,
encompasses both angle and ranging resolution: angle
resolution refers to the minimum angle interval between
two resolvable objects while ranging resolution denotes
the minimum distance between them. For RF sensing,
it has been shown that angle and range resolution are
inversely proportional to the effective aperture of the
sensing array and the leveraged bandwidth, respectively.
• Timeliness: Continuous detection and tracking are cru-
cial for enabling time-sensitive applications such as
autonomous driving and healthcare. It requires timely
observation and understanding of dynamic environments.
Timeliness quantifies the performance of these sensing
tasks in terms of the quality of the environment sensing
and analysis being done at a favorable time slot. Particular
timeliness metrics include age of information (AoI), rate
of false alarms, and track latency, etc.
2) Communication Metrics: In the context of ISEA sys-
tems, several communication metrics defined in traditional
wireless networks are expected to be adopted and extended
for performance evaluation. These metrics include:
• Throughput: As one of the most important metrics in
traditional communication systems, throughput reflects
the efficiency of bit stream transmission. Broadly, it
relates to the data rate metric during system optimization,
which quantifies the number of bits reliably transmit-
ted over a unit bandwidth per second. The well-known
Shannon equation has explicitly revealed the relationship
between data rate and relevant communication parameters
including bandwidth, signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR), multi-
antenna precoding, and beamforming. In ISEA, com-
munication throughput extends beyond merely achieving
reliable bit transmission. It encompasses the transmission
efficiency of semantics associated with specific sensing
tasks. For instance, in multi-view sensing, AirComp-
based feature pooling exemplifies how local features can
be fused using noisy transmission to significantly enhance
transmission efficiency while maintaining comparable
sensing accuracy to scenarios with reliable transmis-
sion. Furthermore, ISEA emphasizes the effectiveness of
sensing execution, prompting throughput measurements
to adopt an importance-aware approach. This approach
ensures that the transmission of critical semantic in-
formation is prioritized, aligning with the overarching
objectives of the sensing task at hand.
• Latency: Communication latency in ISEA mainly com-
prises the time usage of the exchange and aggregation of
raw sensory data and intermediate results (e.g., features
and model parameters), although the control signaling
latency also becomes non-negligible for ultra-low-latency
16
applications. Limited communication resources and hos-
tile wireless channels often exacerbate this challenge,
particularly in scenarios with extensive access demands.
To meet the stringent timeliness constraints inherent in
ISEA, optimizing communication latency necessitates a
holistic approach that integrates the design of air interface
techniques and computation strategies.
• Energy efficiency: Energy consumption emerges as a
critical domain in ISEA design, as it directly influences
both the system’s lifetime and implementation costs. The
overall energy usage in an ISEA system consists of
the power consumption for sensing, computation, and
communications. Energy efficiency can be used to eval-
uate energy consumption, which is defined as the ratio
of the attained performance gain to the total consumed
energy. To ensure a high level of energy efficiency, power
consumption needs to be minimized via power control
strategies and resource management subject to resource
constraints and sensing operations.
• Mobility: Mobility management is another important
domain concerned by ISEA due to the natural movements
of both sensors and targets. Unlike traditional takeover
strategies employed in cellular networks, which primarily
revolve around device mobility and base station (BS) cov-
erage, mobility management in ISEA necessitates a more
nuanced approach. Specifically, ISEA mobility manage-
ment must consider not only the movement of sensors
but also the association between sensors and targets. This
association is guided by the observation capabilities of
sensors, including fields of view and equipment types.
By incorporating these factors into mobility management
strategies, ISEA can optimize sensor-target associations
to maximize sensing effectiveness and ensure accurate
data collection in dynamic environments.
3) Computation Metrics: The execution of ISEA entails
a collection of computing operations, ranging from pre-
processing raw sensory data to feature extraction to data
fusion. The efficiency of these computations is characterized
by the algorithms’ time and space complexity, as introduced
below.
• Time complexity: Time complexity, which can be quan-
tified by the required floating-point operations per second
(FLOPS), denotes the running time of an algorithm within
given computing resources, such as CPU frequency. In-
tegrated with communication latency into overall ISEA
timelines, time complexity and its associated computing
latency serve as key metrics for system optimization, in-
fluencing decisions regarding task offloading and resource
management.
• Space complexity: Conversely, space complexity focuses
on the implementation of learning algorithms, particularly
being concerned if high-dimensional data reading and
writing occur. For example, employing a complex neural
network on a lightweight device may be undesirable
due to the frequent high-dimensional data operations
it requires and the resulting memory requirements. To
address storage constraints, it is essential to design low-
complexity algorithms that strike a balance between per-
formance and efficiency, ensuring optimal system opera-
tion while conserving resources.
4) Tradeoffs: Although there may be consensus on optimiz-
ing certain metrics in ISEA systems, such as improving ISEA
timeliness by minimizing both communication and computa-
tion latency, the tradeoffs between the aforementioned metrics
often manifest in an impossible trinity: sensing performance,
communication efficiency, and computation efficiency. Specif-
ically, achieving high energy efficiency and low latency while
simultaneously maintaining optimal sensing accuracy is often
infeasible. This inherent trade-off arises because of the limited
system resources. For example, optimizing communication ef-
ficiency and latency may involve aggressive data compression
to remote servers, potentially compromising sensing accuracy.
In contrast, prioritizing high sensing accuracy may necessitate
more extensive computations and data transmissions, leading
to increased energy consumption and resource requirements.
As a result, designers of ISEA systems must carefully bal-
ance these competing objectives based on the application’s
specific requirements and available resources. This may in-
volve employing novel signal processing techniques, adaptive
algorithms, and resource allocation strategies that dynamically
optimize system performance within the constraints of the
impossible trinity.
C. Lessons Learned
• Different from the rate-maximization principle in conven-
tional mobile networks, ISEA aims at optimized E2E task
performance, e.g., sensing accuracy, E2E latency, and en-
ergy efficiency. This involves the coordinated integration
of sensing, AI, and communication to efficiently process
and transmit task-relevant sensory data.
• Specifically, communication links are designed to be
aware of the semantics and characteristics of the conveyed
sensing data. By leveraging the interaction between these
factors and the time-varying network connectivity, ISEA
implements modality-aware communication schemes that
outperforms modality-agnostic approaches in efficiency.
Second, ISEA adopts an integrated communication and
computing design to optimize resource allocation and de-
velop transmission protocols tailored for AI-empowered
sensing models. Finally, all ISEA designs and optimiza-
tions target the E2E sensing task performance, allowing
for the utilization of challenges in rate-oriented commu-
nication systems, such as channel noise and interference,
to benefit downstream tasks.
• Following the task-oriented principle, the ISEA perfor-
mance is evaluated with a broad set of metrics that go
beyond the scope of existing communication systems.
Notably, sensing metrics play a crucial role in ISEA de-
sign, encompassing accuracy/uncertainty, estimation er-
ror, coverage, resolution, and timeliness. Communication
metrics, such as throughput, latency, energy efficiency,
and mobility, are also integral to ISEA but are adapted to
align more closely with downstream tasks. For instance,
throughput in ISEA extends beyond mere transmission
17
Actuators
Sensors
Data pre-
processing
Feature 
extraction
Selection and 
compression
Edge Brain
Sensory 
fusion
Task-specific 
inference
Sensory data transmission
Command issuing
Decision 
making
Horizontal data exchange
Central Brain
Distilled intelligence 
aggregation
Model dispatching
Fig. 5. ISEA consists of four main components, namely, sensors, edge brain,
central brain, and actuators. The execution of latency-sensitive sensing tasks
involves sensors transmitting sensory data to the edge brain for semantic
understanding, inference, and command issuing to actuators. Data exchanges
between the edge brain and the central brain are mainly longer-term model
updates.
efficiency to encompass rates of sensing semantic trans-
mission [107] and task completion [62]. Additionally,
computation metrics like time complexity and space
complexity must be factored in for end-to-end system
functionality. While achieving high performance across
all metrics may not always be achievable, ISEA designers
must strike a balance among these metrics within resource
constraints to meet the needs of specific tasks.
V. ARCHITECTURES OF ISEA
ISEA is a comprehensive framework orchestrating key com-
ponents and operations involved in the sensing task execution
for task performance. Meanwhile, the ISEA architecture de-
sign shall possess high versatility such that it can be specifi-
cized for a wide range of applications with highly heteroge-
neous scales and complexity, as well as on various platforms
with different communication capabilities, network topologies,
and computing power. In what follows, we first describe the
general architecture of ISEA, covering its key components,
computation operations, and communication interfaces, which
is illustrated in Fig. 5. Then, we specify five ISEA paradigms
with different function placements and topologies.
A. General Architecture
1) Key Components: In this subsection, we introduce key
components of the ISEA architecture, namely, sensors, edge
brain, central brain, and actuators.
• Sensors: Sensors convert the information of the physical
world, such as light intensity and depth information,
into digital signals. The sensory data stream can be
either sporadic or at a fixed rate. While conventionally
being independent modules with dedicated hardware,
sensors can be software-defined, sharing hardware and
interfaces with other functions, of which the most notable
examples include virtual sensors in industrial IoT and
ISAC-empowered RF sensing using communication sig-
nals. Sensors are often equipped with application-specific
integrated circuits or processors for basic front-end signal
processing such as denoising, filtering, and encoding. By
now, advances in microprocessors allow sensors to be
equipped with higher-level computation capabilities, even
including lightweight AI computations. Examples include
GPUs and Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs)
equipped on UAVs, and digital signal processors (DSPs)
tailored for AI processing on image sensors [108]. This
opens up the possibility of moving higher-level functions,
such as feature extraction, compression, and coarse pat-
tern recognition to sensors to reduce the network traffic
and computation load at edge or cloud servers.
• Edge brain: Edge brain refers to the collection of
intelligent edge nodes in proximity to sensors, capable of
data reception, caching, aggregation, and AI-empowered
analytics of sensory data in a concerted manner. While
still subject to limited power and computing budgets,
these edge nodes are expected to carry moderate AI
computing performance (e.g., ∼10 TFLOPS in half
precision) and storage capacity for sensing inference
or training on state-of-the-art AI models. In the edge
brain, neural network layers can be distributed among
interconnected edge servers for collaborative computing
based on distributed machine learning approaches such as
split machine learning [109]–[111], thereby reducing E2E
latency. When edge nodes collaborate, smashed data (ac-
tivations at neural network layers) can be extracted from
sensory data, moving across the edge networks. Also, the
sensory data from various distributed sensors should be
appropriately fused at the edge brain to achieve global
environmental awareness. In this way, distributed edge
nodes aggregate asynchronous-arriving sensory data for
multi-view multi-modal fusion, gathering ever-changing
environmental data for on-the-fly fine-tuning, and main-
taining a compact library of context-aware AI models
for inference, thereby enhancing detection accuracy and
making informed decisions. Not only network equipment
such as BS, routers, or dedicated edge AI stations can
be part of the edge brain. Depending on the dynamic
wireless link and battery states, user devices, e.g., mobile
phones and vehicles, can also be scheduled for collabo-
rative computing as part of the edge brain.
• Central brain: Located at cloud data centers, the central
brain is equipped with massive computation capability
for handling computation-intensive tasks, such as training
large language models and executing global decision-
making. Nevertheless, the long geographic distance to
users and potential traffic congestion within the backbone
network make it unsuitable for inference tasks with de-
manding latency requirements. In ISEA, the central brain
mainly performs the following functions. First, the central
cloud is capable of global aggregation of distilled infor-
mation from the edge brain to accomplish computation-
18
intensive yet time-insensitive tasks, such as urban plan-
ning. Second, it serves as the highest-level parameter
server in hierarchical FL, consistently aggregating trained
model parameters from geographically distributed edge
nodes for global model updates and distribution. At last,
the central brain stores a large number of AI models for
diverse sensing tasks of different sizes and complexities.
This enables in-time downloading of suitable AI models
onto the edge brain.
• Actuators: Actuators receive real-time commands from
the edge brain and interact with the real world accord-
ingly. For example, a robotic arm receives movement
inputs from a robot planning server and grasps the object
referred to by human instructions; a traffic light has its
pattern controlled by an intelligent controller analyzing
real-time traffic of surrounding blocks.
2) Computation Operations and AI Backbones:
While
ISEA is envisioned to support various sensing tasks using
different AI models, they share similarities in the computing
stage. A typical pipeline of computation operations in the
ISEA system includes data pre-processing, feature extraction,
feature selection and compression, sensory fusion, and task-
specific inference.
• Data pre-processing: This stage involves pre-processing
of the raw sensory data into suitable forms for input to
the AI model or wireless transmission, e.g., de-noising,
filtering, and normalization. Usually, this stage does not
involve neural-network operations, which hence can be
implemented with on-sensor circuits.
• Feature extraction: In this stage, feature extractors are
applied to the pre-processed sensory data to generate
semantic representation in the feature space, which can be
fed into a task-specific head for downstream inference in
the following computation stages. The feature extractors
are typically generic backbone models trained for specific
data types but not restricted to specific downstream tasks.
In other words, the extracted features can be reused
for different tasks by simply inputting the corresponding
downstream model. For example, ConvNeXt and vision
transformers (ViTs) for 2D images have been proven to
be efficient backbones for multiple computer vision tasks
ranging from object detection to classification to seg-
mentation, delivering satisfactory performance without
backbone fine-tuning. For point cloud data, PointPillar
[38] and VoxelNet [37] are prevalent backbones for object
detection and semantic segmentation. The advantages of
generic feature extractors include more efficient storage
usage and less communication cost due to feature reuse
for multiple tasks.
• Feature selection and compression: The selection and
compression of features to reduce communication cost
is necessary for settings where features should be ex-
changed between ISEA components, e.g., when extracted
features are transmitted to edge nodes for task-specific in-
ference. Generic feature compression techniques include
encoder-decoder and information bottleneck to encode
high-dimensional features into a compact but informative
representation for transmission or feature pruning to re-
move redundant feature dimensions. Aiming at a specific
goal, e.g., finding a missing person, local gateway models
can determine whether the features need to be transmitted
by evaluating the correlation between the features and
task-relevant information, such as a semantic query.
• Sensory fusion: Sensory fusion is a key stage for sensing
with multiple modalities, multiple views, or both. In
ISEA, the fusion occurs at the edge brain which col-
lects and aggregates sensory information from multiple
sensors. Due to the high dimensionality of raw data
and privacy concerns, the fusion of abstract features up-
loaded by sensors is necessary. Concatenation is arguably
the most straightforward approach without information
loss, but meanwhile results in a high feature dimension,
slowing down training and inference. For multi-view
sensing, a more efficient approach, called view-pooling,
is widely adopted for both image and point cloud features
which incurs element-wise averaging or max-out across
all feature maps. The fusion method is embedded in the
model architecture. For features whose dimensions cor-
respond to spatial locations, e.g., voxel features obtained
from the point cloud, the individual observation needs
to be projected onto a global coordinate defined by the
edge brain, known as spatial alignment, via coordinate
transformation or learned models such as BEVFusion.
• Task-specific
inference: This stage applies a task-
specific head onto the generic, fused feature to obtain the
desired sensing result. Examples include convolutional
neural network (CNN)-based image classifiers for object
recognition and regional proposal networks for detection
tasks. The computation overhead of such models can vary,
from simple linear classifiers to sophisticated designs.
Depending on the heterogeneous computing capabilities and
communication links, these computation operations can be
deployed onto different components in ISEA, resulting in
various paradigms as detailed in Section V-B.
3) Communication Interface: ISEA relies heavily on the
seamless delivery of sensory information among the dis-
tributed network entities, e.g., sensors/actuators, edge brains,
and cloud brains. An ISEA system typically comprises two
primary modes of data transmission:
• Vertical data transmission: In this mode, ISEA partic-
ipants deliver sensory data, extracted features, or com-
puting results to another level to facilitate hierarchical
data analytics. For instance, cooperative sensing normally
involves multi-access uplink transmission for data aggre-
gation from distributed devices, after which the global
decision or perception results can be disseminated to
sensors via downlink broadcasting.
• Horizontal data exchange: Participants at the same level
can share their perception data nearby, thereby reducing
transmission latency. For instance, in a V2V system,
vehicles can broadcast information such as sensory data,
speed, headings, and brake status for rapid danger iden-
tification and warning triggers.
The communication interface within ISEA can be estab-
19
lished through wired and wireless channels. Wired commu-
nication, carrying data over wired links such as fiber optics,
offers stable and efficient data transfer over long distances.
Conversely, wireless communication utilizes radio waves, pro-
viding flexible and ubiquitous connectivity for short-distance
communications. However, the dynamic nature of channel
conditions and resource constraints (e.g., bandwidth, energy,
and time) in wireless transmission necessitates ongoing task-
specific designs, contributing to its rapid evolution.
Conventional wireless communication techniques applicable
to ISEA can be broadly categorized into digital and analog
schemes, each adhering to diverse design principles, trans-
mitted data formats, and applicable scenarios. The digital
air interface is primarily built on the theoretical foundations
of Shannon’s theory, where sensory data and intermediate
results are converted into bits via sequential execution of
quantization, source (entropy) coding, and channel coding,
and the bit streams are then modulated onto constellations
according to well-designed modulation schemes for radio
transmission. Compared to its digital counterpart, analog trans-
mission employs uncoded linearly modulated ISEA data as
the transmission symbols. It retains the structure of ISEA
data during transmission at the cost of channel distortion.
Therefore, basic computation operations can be integrated
with wireless transmissions, empowering efficient sensory data
delivery such as AirComp-based aggregation.
B. Paradigms
Next, we introduce five paradigms of ISEA as illustrated
in Fig. 6 with different configurations of computation work-
load and communication links and discuss their application
scenarios.
1) AI-on-Sensor ISEA: In this paradigm, an AI model is
completely deployed on sensors, which perceive and analyze
sensory information and make decisions on their own. This
paradigm is suitable for the most latency-critical scenarios
as it does not incur data transmission latency. However, the
size and computational complexity of on-sensor AI models
are strictly limited by the storage and computation capability
of sensors. While primarily relying on sensors’ computation
power, there can still be interactions between sensors and
edge nodes. The first situation is achieving proposal-level
fusion, i.e., receiving and aggregating local inference results,
such as categorical probability and detection boxes, via fusion
schemes such as majority vote. The communication latency
is significantly lower than the feature-level fusion due to the
low data volume of inference results. Second, sensors can
participate in FL by transmitting their local updates to an
edge brain, or the edge brain can distribute update-to-date AI
models to heterogeneous sensors.
2) AI-on-Server ISEA: In this paradigm, the computation
is completely offloaded to edge servers with rich computation
resources. The uploaded sensory data can either be raw data
or pre-processed data that only requires minimal computation
capabilities at sensors. AI-on-Server ISEA usually refers to the
case where a large number of low-cost sensors cooperatively
sense environments, monitoring temperature, humidity and
sound intensity. In this case, only the aggregated data convey-
ing critical underlying information requires computing, while
data obtained by each sensor alone carries little information.
Meanwhile, on-sensor feature extraction is unnecessary and/or
infeasible due to the locally sensed data’s simplicity and low
dimensionality (e.g., only one numerical value per frame for
air quality sensing). While the data rate requirement for each
sensor is low, a communication bottleneck can still occur due
to multiple access by a potentially massive number of sensors
and extremely stringent RF power constraints at sensors.
3) Split ISEA: Split ISEA primarily relies on split infer-
ence [70], [112] and split learning [109], in both of which the
AI model is divided into sub-models for deployment on both
the sensor and server. In split inference, a sub-model operates
on the sensor, extracting feature maps from raw sensory data,
while the remaining model resides on the server, performing
inference with a global view based on the feature maps
uploaded by the sensor. In split learning, the devices train on-
device sub-models locally in parallel, and upload activations to
the server for on-server model training. In contrast to AI-on-
sensor and AI-on-server, the split ISEA paradigm introduces
a flexible computation allocation between the sensor and
the server. This flexibility significantly enhances resilience
in scenarios with diverse on-device and central computation
resources [113], [114]. Moreover, by keeping the raw data pro-
cessing localized at the sensor and only transmitting abstracted
feature maps to the server, split ISEA minimizes the exposure
of sensitive sensory data, contributing to a more secure and
privacy-aware system architecture. The optimization of the
model splitting is the main concern in split ISEA. To minimize
E2E latency, smart splitting strategies are proposed to reach a
balance between local computation and data uploading subject
to local computation/memory constraints. Furthermore, in the
case of multi-tasks, efforts are made to jointly optimize model
splitting, access control, and task scheduling among sensors.
4) Cooperative ISEA: ISEA equipped with a single sensor
may encounter inherent limitations when perceiving complex
environments [73], [115]. For instance, for a camera-based
sensor, the information captured within captured images is in-
herently constrained by the camera’s field of view (FoV). This
limitation poses challenges for tasks like object detection and
semantic segmentation, especially in scenes with occlusion.
In the case of LiDAR-based sensing, point clouds exhibit data
irregularities, characterized by an “intense in proximity, sparse
in the distance” pattern, due to reflectivity reduction [116].
Cooperative ISEA emerges as a promising solution to over-
come the constraints of FoV limitations and data irregularities
by assigning a server to combine data or intermediate results
generated by distributed cross-modal sensors for cooperative
perception. The collaborative strategy often outperforms in-
dividual detection, thanks to the complementary nature of
sensory outcomes. The collaboration within cooperative ISEA
can occur at different levels: data level, feature level, and
proposal level. This corresponds to the fusion of raw sensory
data from various modalities and localizations through spatial
alignment, the combination of feature maps computed from
raw data in the feature space via concatenation or element-
wise multiplication, and the integration of prediction results
20
(a) AI-on-Sensor ISEA
(b) Split ISEA
(c) AI-on-Server ISEA
(d) Cooperative ISEA
(f) Hierarchical ISEA
Intermediate features
Server
Sensor
Pre-processed data
Server
Sensor
Local perceptions
Server
Sensor
Full model 
downloading
Full model 
downloading
Global model 
downloading
Local model 
downloading
Model 
splitting
Terrestrial
Extraterrestrial
Fig. 6.
ISEA can be instantiated into different paradigms depending on the placement of AI models and computation powers, network topologies, and
communication capabilities.
made by individual sensors utilizing their on-device models
[117].
5) Hierarchical ISEA: Hierarchical ISEA offers strong re-
silience for perception systems with heterogeneous capabilities
of sensing, computation, and communication. Specifically, it
can divide a global sensing task into several sub-tasks and
then assign the sub-tasks of data collection and data analytics
to system components according to their resources. Consider
field monitoring with a sensor-edge-cloud architecture, where
the expansive sensing can be decoupled into the detection
of a set of subareas. Each edge node is responsible for a
single subarea according to its physical location, performing
local data analytics (e.g., feature extraction/fusion) from raw
data or pre-processed results aggregated from sensors within
their coverage. Then, the extracted information across different
edge nodes is further aggregated to the central cloud to make
globally informed decisions.
Hierarchical ISEA is also developed from the integration
of ISEA with communication networks with a natural hierar-
chical architecture, for example, satellite-terrestrial edge com-
puting [94]. Air-ground systems can realize high-resolution
classification, perception, and environmental mapping. The
complementarity of extraterrestrial and terrestrial sensing re-
sults in improved performance in modern sensing applications
like autonomous driving and smart cities.
The five ISEA paradigms—split, AI-on-server, AI-on-
sensor, hierarchical, and cooperative—are not mutually ex-
clusive but represent distinct characteristic dimensions of
ISEA deployment. For instance, the first three paradigms
(split, AI-on-server, and AI-on-sensor) define model place-
ment strategies with trade-offs in hardware, communication,
and computational complexity, while cooperative ISEA ad-
dresses multi-device coordination challenges. Crucially, these
paradigms can be combined adaptively: hierarchical structures
may employ different placement strategies across layers, and
cooperative systems can integrate hybrid architectures (e.g.,
split for latency-sensitive tasks and AI-on-sensor for privacy
constraints). Such flexibility, however, necessitates advanced
scheduling algorithms and communication optimization, un-
derscoring the need for context-aware ISEA design.
C. Lessons Learned
• The general architecture of ISEA includes sensors, edge
brain, central brain and actuators. Sensors transform
physical world information into digital signals. It is worth
pointing out that sensors are not limited to standalone
devices (e.g., cameras), but may coexist with other func-
tions in shared hardware, such as RF sensing in ISAC
systems. Edge brain encompasses all intelligent nodes
in an edge network, which constantly communicate and
collaborate with each other to accomplish ISEA tasks.
The central brain, located in cloud data centers, focuses
on time-insensitive operations such as global information
aggregation and periodic model update distribution due
to high access latency. The decisions made by edge
brain are sent to actuators to interact with the physical
environment.
• Computation operations are integral to the execution of
an ISEA task and can be deployed to various ISEA com-
ponents based on device capabilities and collaboration
21
mode. The characteristics of these computing operations
vary substantially with the sensing data modality and AI
backbone used [118]. As these operations are distributed
across different nodes, communication interface between
ISEA components are necessitated, including vertical
data transmission for offloading or data aggregation and
horizontal data exchange for peer collaboration.
• ISEA
instances
can
be
categorized
into
different
paradigms depending on the placement of AI models onto
nodes, network topology and collaboration protocols. It
is importance to notice that these paradigms can be
combined or switched between in a shared ISEA system
depending on the task requirements.
VI. DIGITAL AIR INTERFACE FOR INTEGRATED SENSING
AND EDGE AI
The operations of ISEA involve intense wireless horizontal
and vertical data exchange, bottlenecking task performance
metrics due to hostile channel fading and high dimensionality
of sensory information. The existing digital air interface tech-
nologies, designed under rate-centric and best-effort principles,
cannot guarantee the QoS in terms of latency and reliability
desired by ISEA applications. In 6G, it is expected that the
digital air interface will evolve in its physical and link layers
oriented towards satisfactory task performance under poten-
tially bursting request arrivals. In the ISEA context, the digital
air interface design shall be designed with sensing awareness
and oriented towards ISEA performance by considering task-
related aspects such as sensing semantics, data importance,
sensor importance, and computation capabilities. This section
reviews research efforts on digital air interface dedicated to
ISEA applications in the said direction from different aspects
including JSCC, access control, and RRM, as illustrated in
Fig. 7.
A. Joint Source-Channel Coding
JSCC in ISEA unites the separated coding blocks and
optimizes them towards ISEA-oriented QoS requirements, e.g.,
inference accuracy at a split ISEA system where successive
feature delivery is involved [143]. Many works have been done
in this domain. The schemes in [119] target the design of
task-specific analog-to-digital converters (ADC) that perform
sampling and quantization over a sensed continuous-time
signal for efficient extracting of digital information desired by
downstream signal classification instead of exact signal recon-
struction. Such specific learnable ADC design could be applied
in MIMO communication channels where multi-variate signals
are transmitted for identifying disparate sensing objects’ echos
with competitive accuracy performance but reduce the power
consumption in traditional exact signal recovery [120]. DL-
based JSCC enables E2E training targeting downstream ISEA
tasks with varied performance metrics. For example, one
application scenario of JSCC is the low-latency transmission
of sensed signals, e.g., images for on-server classification of
the signal type, e.g., class of the observed object. In [121],
aiming at remote classification of sensed signal, the authors
apply a neural network encoder to map the signal source to
symbols and a neural network receiver that directly predicts the
label from received symbols without the redundancy of signal
reconstruction. While demonstrating superior performance, the
authors also point out its vulnerability to smart adversarial
attacks. In [122], deep source coding is employed with an
adaptive density model and jointly tuned with channel coding
rates for optimizing the E2E performance metric derived via
the analysis of the Bayesian model in the JSCC system.
Building on the E2E task metric, an effective and explain-
able JSCC technique is an explicit characterization of data
importance for consideration in channel coding. In [123], con-
sidering split ISEA inference, the sensed data is first encoded
into semantic features, whose importance to the downstream
ISEA task is measured via the designed Semantic Task Rel-
evance module and Inter-Semantics Relevance module. Then,
the obtained importance is integrated into the optimization
of bit and subcarrier allocation to maximize an objective
considering both task performance improvement and distortion
suppression. The work in [124] applies the variational autoen-
coder to provide an explainable and transparent JSCC system
that disentangles the extracted features and transmits only
the sensing-relevant ones according to the derived semantic
channel capacity bounds. Considering a collaborative ISEA
scenario where multiple sensors have different modalities,
[107] utilized the framework of robust verification problem
to derive the respective importance, i.e., the contribution to
the inference task, of different modalities. Then, an unequal
error protection scheme based on the derived importance is
applied to protect important modalities.
B. Access Control
Traditionally, access control involves protocols and resource
allocation schemes to coordinate multiple devices under a
shared wireless medium, the performance metrics of which
include access latency, throughput, fairness, etc. In ISEA,
while these metrics are still of practical value, the ultimate
goal of access control design is to optimize downstream
task performance by considering data semantics. It is worth
pointing out that access control schemes can overlap with radio
resource allocation, which is the theme of the next subsection.
However, here we cover mechanism designs for connection es-
tablishments based on data or task importance, while research
works where sensor scheduling is part of optimal resource
allocation are reviewed in the next subsection. There are two
mainstream approaches to multi-access techniques in ISEA,
namely, active data source selection and random access. The
former usually involves the requester using meta-information,
e.g., low-dimensional queries and feedback, to identify and
admit task-relevant sensors into the uplink transmissions. The
scheduling criteria jointly examine the state of the channel
and the semantic relevance of each sensor. The latter is an
extension of conventional random access, where users contend
for channel resources in a decentralized manner, involving
the importance of data as a factor in the access protocol.
In parallel, sample-wise offloading gates can be designed to
determine whether a task should be offloaded to the server
based on the confidence level of edge devices.
22
TABLE II
SUMMARY OF RELATED WORKS ON DIGITAL AIR INTERFACE FOR ISEA
Approaches
Ref.
Sensing Scenario
Performance Metrics
Key Contribution
JSSC
[119] Sensing task-based ADC converters
Multivariate signals
classification accuracy
Design task-specific ADCs extracting digital information
representations from multivariate continuous-time signals
[120] Sensing task-based ADC conversion for MIMO
receivers
[121] Split ISEA for classification of sensed data
Inference accuracy
An encoder-decoder pair trained for E2E accuracy without explicit signal
reconstruction
[122] Transmission of sensed image to server
Image reconstruction qual-
ity
Deep source coding jointly tuned with the channel coding rates for
optimized E2E performance
[123] Split ISEA for classification of sensed data
Inference accuracy, recon-
struction error
Use the importance of semantic features for downstream inference for
bit and subcarrier allocation
[124] Explainable task-oriented communication
Semantic channel capacity,
reconstruction error
Select task-related semantic features to transmit
[107] Collaborative ISEA inference where sensors have
different modalities
Sentiment score prediction
error
Derivation of varied modality importance for unequal error protection
Access Control
[125] A UAV with image sensors transmits semantic
triplets to users per their different queries
Triplet drop probability, se-
mantic matching score
Identification of personalized saliency to prioritize power allocation for
key semantic triplets
[126] An agent with a degraded view selects a helper to
receive the required information
Sensing accuracy, commu-
nication overhead
Proposes a handshake protocol where the requester sends a low-
dimensional query to requester for semantic matching
[127]
A service requester aims to find task-relevant sen-
sory data from data sources distributed in the
network
Missing rate, communica-
tion latency
Proposes sending queries for locating relevant data sources and joint
semantic-channel matching
[128] Multiple cooperative vehicles exchange sensory
information via V2V networks
Total perception gain
Design of a mobility-aware distributed sensor scheduling algorithm to
maximize the expected perception gain
[129] Multiple agents communicate repeatedly until a
holistic view of the environment is formed
Object detection precision,
communication overhead
Exchanges spatial confidence maps among sensors to trigger feature
transmission on critical areas
[130] FL where sensors located in a cell have asyn-
chronous local updates
Aggregation error
Proposes multichannel random access for data uploading with optimized
access probability
[131] FL over massive MIMO systems with asyn-
chronous local updates
Learning convergence rate
Proposes a random access scheme utilizing an access class barring
method to select the uploading devices
[132]
Collaborative inference where the sensor wirelessly
transmits intermediate features via JSCC for infer-
ence offloading
Inference accuracy, com-
munication cost
Designs a transmission-decision neural network by jointly considering
sample confidence and SNR levels
[133] Collaborative inference where the sensor can of-
fload samples to the server or execute locally
Average
accuracy,
infer-
ence latency
Design of hard-case discriminators and a collaborative scheduler adaptive
to C2 resource conditions
RRM
[134]
Connected vehicles scheduled to upload sensing
data to multiple servers for model training and
subsequent inference
Overall
perception
accu-
racy of all trained models
Joint association, power and bandwidth allocation for maximizing the
quality of training
[135] An ISAC system where one BS simultaneously
senses and transmits data packet to multiple users
Total
power,
network
stability,
detection
performance
Dynamic power and subcarrier allocation scheme for power minimization
with queue awareness
[136] A collaborative ISEA system where the BS aggre-
gates data from multiple RF sensors
Sensing disciminant gain
Joint allocation of communication time, quantization bit and transmission
energy
[137]
A collaborative ISEA system where an access point
(AP) aggregates data from multiple sensors and
broadcasts the fused data
Total execution time
Information extractor design and a task-oriented channel allocation
mechanism
[138] FL under hybrid data partitioning, i.e., with multi-
ple groups of different-type sensors
Model
training
performance,
resource
consumption
Solving the data dependence issue and joint sensor scheduling, bandwidth
allocation and quantization optimization
[56]
Autonomous driving where vehicles and the server
are equipped with shallow and deep sub-models
respectively
Inference accuracy, latency,
energy consumption
A multi-task-learning based module for joint offloading decision and
resource allocation
[114]
Inference in industrial IoT where models are de-
ployed at consoles, edge servers and cloud with
increasing complexity
Total delay and inference
accuracy
Optimized task offloading decision and resource allocation given wireless
network conditions
[139] An edge server supports the object detection of
multiple vehicles
Average
precision,
delay
and energy
Dividing the task into real-time and delay-tolerant tasks with respective
resource allocation optimization
[140]
A split inference system involving a UAV and a
BS where the UAV can switch between uploading
raw data or features
Total energy consumption
Embedding the optimal power allocation into a tiny reinforcement
learning algorithm for optimal mode selection
[141] Split ISEA supporting inference request from mul-
tiple users
Task success probability
Joint optimization of compression ratio selection, user selection and
resource allocation with task priorities
[62]
An edge server supports inference requests from
multiple sensors
Inference throughput
Optimal task scheduling and bandwidth allocation with batching and
early exiting
[25]
Collaborative ISEA with model partitioning
Weighted sum energy con-
sumption
Energy minimization by splitting point selection and C2 resource allo-
cation
[142] Collaborative perception in vehicle networks
E2E
latency,
perception
probability
Joint optimization of compression ratio, collaborator selection, offloading
decision and computation resource allocation with Lyapunov-aided deep
reinforcement learning
23
Receiver
AI
Model
Source 
coding
Sensing data
Channel 
coding
Data 
transmitter
Sensed data upload
Instruction oﬄoad
Instructions
Tunable module
(a)
Query/pilot broadcast and score/channel feedback
Data transmission
Data heterogeneity
User scheduler
Matching scores
Channel states
Receiver
Inference 
Model
Matching function
Local data
Received query
Score 
feedback
Data 
transmitter
Scheduler signalling
Scheduled
Scheduled
(b)
Bandwidth allocation
Device 1
Device 3
Device 2
On-device 
model
Tx power 
allocation
Ofﬂoad
Early exiting
Server/channel states
Conﬁdence 
level
Cache 
management
Computation resource 
allocation
(c)
Fig. 7.
Digital-air-interface techniques designed for ISEA can be categorized
into three key aspects: (a) joint source-channel coding, (b) access control, and
(c) radio resource allocation.
1) Data Source Selection: Data source selection serves as
a common framework for scheduling the transmissions of
data sources based on sensory semantics and communication
metrics, e.g., channel conditions as coordinated by the data
requester. A line of research adopts the query-and-feedback
approach, where the information requester sends compact
semantic queries to candidate providers, which feed back
a matching score for scheduling relevant users. In [125], a
UAV-based image acquisition scenario is considered where
users retrieve images of interest from the UAV. A task-
oriented access scheme is designed where the users match their
query text with the low-dimensional semantic features encoded
and transmitted by the UAV and only download original
images that are sufficiently matched. The semantic encoder
is designed with an awareness of users’ subjective interest,
and the radio resource allocation is optimized for reliable
transmission of the extracted semantic information. Who2com
[126] considers a collaborative perception scenario where a
sensor with degraded views seeks assistance from neighbor-
ing sensors for complementary observations. To enhance the
communication efficiency, the degraded agent broadcasts a
low-dimensional query to other sensors, which compute a
matching score between the query and local observations
via a learnable attention mechanism and feed back to the
degraded agent. Based on the matching scores, the requester
chooses one of the helping sensors with the most semantically
relevant information to access the full observation. From a C2
integrated perspective, semantic data sourcing is proposed in
[127], which selects the data source based on joint semantic-
and-channel matching, featuring a quality indicator comprising
both semantic and channel factors. In the absence of feedback,
the past uploaded data can be utilized to predict the value of
sensors’ current data. In this direction, a mobility-aware sensor
scheduling scheme is developed in [128] for a V2V scenario
where an ego vehicle determines and accesses information
from an optimal sharer based on locality, channel states, and
sensor qualities. The optimal sensor scheduling problem is
formulated, for which a learning-while-scheduling approach
is designed to predict the performance gain of accessing
each sensor based on historical observations. Then, the ego
vehicle accesses the data of the sharer bearing the maximum
perception gain, compressed subject to the rate constraint.
Besides, Where2comm [129] targets a scenario where multiple
sensors equipped with cameras and LiDARs communicate
repeatedly until a holistic view of the environment is formed.
The customized spatial confidence map indicates a sensor’s
knowledge level on a BEV coordinate of the perception region.
By exchanging the binary confidence maps among agents,
feature transmission is triggered only if one sensor has high
confidence in a spatial region about which another sensor is
uncertain. This procedure is repeated for multiple rounds until
all agents share the same global view.
2) Random Access: In ISEA applications with stringent
latency requirements, even the centralized control complexity
and frequent exchange of metadata and control signals become
costly, calling for a revisit of random access techniques. The
random access shall be designed for specific ISEA metrics
such as convergence speed and inference accuracy. For FL
over multiple uploading channels where sensors generate local
updates intermittently, the authors of [130] proposed to use
multichannel ALOHA, a random access scheme instead of
sequential polling, as the latter can lead to idle channels
when the local update is not ready. The access probability
for each device is determined based on the local updates
and server feedback to minimize the aggregation error. A
follow-up work on random access for FL over massive MIMO
system is [131], where each device determines whether to
access the channel to upload local model updates through
an access class barring (ACB) check. The ACB factor is
optimized to maximize the average number of devices involved
in model aggregation, considering the different probabilities
of availability of local updates across devices. In a coop-
erative ISEA inference scenario, [144] proposes a query-
based random access scheme where the requester broadcasts a
semantic query for local matching, and each sensor attempts to
transmit following the ALOHA protocol if the matching score
exceeds a threshold. Compared with the query-and-feedback
mechanism, this semantic-based random access scheme avoids
the overhead of feeding back matching scores, which can be
substantial if only a very small portion of sensors are relevant.
24
3) Sample-wise Offloading Gates: A typical scenario of
ISEA is where sensors offload inference workloads to an edge
server and download the results for subsequent actions. For
efficient resource utilization, an on-sensor gate for offloading
decisions can be applied to determine whether each sample
needs to be offloaded to the server based on its predicted
difficulty. In [132], an early-exit classifier is added to the
device sub-model, allowing devices to obtain the inference
results locally without transmitting features to the server,
where a lightweight transmission decision neural network (TD
NN) is deployed at the device to determine whether the current
sample need to be offloaded to the server for more accurate
inference. The TD NN is trained to minimize a loss function by
combining both the classification entropy and communication
cost. The authors of [133] design a device-cloud collabo-
rative inference framework for object detection, exploiting
the heterogeneous requirements for computation resources of
tasks with different difficulties. A hard-case discriminator is
proposed, which differentiates hard and simple cases based on
the image content and decides whether each sample should be
offloaded to the server or processed locally, considering the
current resource-utilization status.
C. Radio Resource Management
RRM is a classic topic in wireless communications, which
allocates power, spectrum and time among users for high
throughput and fairness. RRM for ISEA shifts the conventional
objective of rate maximization to task-oriented performance
enhancements. To achieve this goal, the sensor connectivity
and semantic relevance of sensors’ observations to the sensing
task of interest shall be considered. It is important to note
that the communication and sensing perspectives are coupled
instead of orthogonal. For example, the geometrical positions
of sensors impact both connectivity and semantics. In addition,
the observations are correlated among sensors, as opposed to
the conventional assumption of independent data streams.
1) Power Control and Bandwidth Allocation: The alloca-
tion of power and bandwidth resources to a given set of sensors
shall consider the heterogeneous channels, data qualities, and
computation capabilities of different sensors to meet the ISEA
task performance requirement. In [134], an edge AI-assisted
autonomous driving system is considered, where connected ve-
hicles are scheduled to upload sensing data to multiple servers
for perception model training. To maximize a defined metric,
i.e., quality of training, the power and bandwidth allocation to
different vehicles and time slots are jointly optimized. In [135],
the authors consider ISAC settings where a BS simultaneously
senses and transmits data packets, arriving in a Poisson pro-
cess, to multiple users with a multi-functional OFDM signal.
The subcarrier and power allocation problem is formulated to
minimize the long-term average power consumption subject to
sensing performance and queueing stability conditions and is
solved via Lyapunov optimization. For multi-device coopera-
tive RF sensing, the authors of [136] studies joint control of
quantization bits, communication time allocation, and energy
allocation to maximize the discriminant gain of sensing. In
a collaborative ISEA system with a fusion center considered
in [137], the inadequacy of uplink communication resources
for uploading all sensing information necessitates informa-
tion extraction, agent selection, and subchannel allocation
according to channel states and importance of messages. The
information extraction module is trained using the information
bottleneck principle, the subchannel allocation is optimized to
maximize the expected information gain, and message fusion
is designed with a double-attention mechanism. The authors
of [138] first propose a primal-descent dual ascent training
algorithm for FL under hybrid data partition, which involves
several groups of sensors with different types, to resolve the
data dependence issue. Then, the optimization problem of
sensor scheduling, bandwidth allocation, and quantization is
formulated to minimize the training residual term and resource
consumption, which is solved in a decentralized manner.
2) Offloading Scheduling: In split ISEA or AI-on-server
ISEA, under limits on communication and computation re-
sources, accommodating all sensors that require computation
offloading can be infeasible. In such cases, the heterogeneity
among requests can be leveraged to optimize the scheduling of
task offloading for global objectives, e.g., utility and through-
put. A two-tier edge AI-assisted autonomous driving system is
outlined in [56], which, similar to split inference, deploys the
shallow layers of the perception model at the vehicles and the
rest at servers. A multi-task learning model is trained to infer
the optimized decisions for offloading decisions and resource
allocation. In [114], the authors consider the inference phase in
industrial IoT, where AI models with different computational
costs and accuracy are deployed at three levels, i.e., consoles,
edge servers, and the cloud. Based on the wireless network
conditions, accuracy requirements, and computational resource
utilization, the task offloading decision and resource alloca-
tion scheme are jointly optimized to minimize the long-term
system cost, which includes processing latency and monetary
loss due to wrong classification. The Lyapunov optimization
technique is employed to solve the optimization problem via
transformation, where both optimal and heuristic algorithms
are proposed. For an ISEA system where the edge server
supports the object detection of multiple vehicles, the authors
in [139] first divide the task into real-time and delay-tolerant
tasks, where the former is executed with the edge server’s GPU
and the latter cached for future inference. A resource allocation
problem is formulated for real-time tasks with the objectives
of maximizing accuracy and minimizing latency. For delay-
tolerant tasks, another problem is formulated of which the
objectives include both accuracy and energy conservation. A
distributed deep Q networks-based algorithm is proposed to
solve both problems.
3) Joint Computation-Communication Resource Allocation:
In ISEA systems, computation and communication resources
can both be bottlenecks of task performance, especially in view
of time-varying channel conditions and limited on-sensor com-
putation capability. This requires a joint controller coordinat-
ing communication and computation operations to ensure full
resource utilization. In [140], a point-to-point split inference
system involving a UAV and a BS is considered, where the
UAV can switch between two modes, i.e., uploading raw data
or extracted features, with different C2 resource consumption.
25
AirComp (waveform 
superposition) 
 
• Average: 
 
• Max:
 
• ……
y = 1
K ∑xk
y = max{x1, x2, ⋯, xK}
Base Station 
With Edge Server
Edge Devices 
with sensors
Local perception models
AirComp pre-processing
Linear modulation + power 
control (precoding)
Global perception models
AirComp post-processing
Denormalization + 
Estimation
(a)
Data- and channel-aware scheduling
Multi-sensor power control
Subcarriers allocation
Interference management
Sensor index
AirComp channel gain 
Uniform threshold 
for alignment
Channel 
inversion
Full power 
transmission
Binary mode 
control
Sensor 1
Sensor 2
Sensor 3
Sensor K
⋯
⋯
Channel diversity
Data diversity
Sensor 1
Subcarrier index
Sensor 2
Sensor K
Effective SNR
Required power 
for alignment
Interference
Cell 1
Cell 2
Cell 3
Interference
Cell 1
Cell 2
Cell 3
Cell 
1/2/3
Orthogonal 
resource 
allocation
Interference 
power control
(b)
Fig. 8.
From the AirComp-based air interface perspective, the paradigms and resource allocation strategies are specifically designed for ISEA. Subfigure (a)
illustrates the general architecture, while subfigure (b) showcases various RRM schemes, including power control, sub-carrier assignment, sensor scheduling,
and interference management.
Such mode switching is jointly optimized with the transmit
power allocation for multiple timeslots and computational
speed to minimize the total energy consumption. The resultant
optimization problem is solved by embedding the optimal
power allocation into a tiny reinforcement learning algorithm
for optimal mode selection. In light of the tradeoff between
reducing communication cost and preventing semantic loss as
regulated by the compression ratio, in [141] a joint ratio selec-
tion and resource allocation problem is formulated for a multi-
user semantic communication system aiming at supporting
inference tasks for users. The solution approach is through al-
ternative minimization that iterates between compression ratios
and resource allocation. Further, a user selection algorithm is
designed via branch and bound under communication resource
constraints, considering that local tasks have different priority
levels. Considering split ISEA where multi-user performs
inference offloading with heterogeneous accuracy and latency
requirements, the authors in [62] propose integrated batching
and early exiting to maximize the system inference throughput.
Under a total bandwidth constraint and different channel states,
the optimized allocation of computation and communication
resources for inference throughput maximization is realized
via a low-complexity sub-optimal algorithm and a tree search-
based optimal algorithm. For collaborative ISEA, the splitting
point between sensor and server sub-models can be jointly op-
timized with C2 resources for minimized energy consumption
subject to delay constraints [25]. For collaborative vehicles,
[142] jointly optimizes collaborator selection, compression
ratio, offloading decision, and computation resource allocation
to minimize the E2E delay subject to a perception probability
requirement.
VII. AIRCOMP-BASED AIR INTERFACE FOR INTEGRATED
SENSING AND EDGE AI
While digital air interface benefits from modular design and
compatibility with existing systems, analog communication
schemes show potential in the most latency-stringent ISEA
operations within limited resources as they promise ultra-low
latency and high scalability. As a representative technology,
AirComp leverages the waveform superposition property of
wireless multi-access channels to realize the desired aggre-
gation function of distributed data by simultaneous transmis-
sions. Its validness in ISEA results from the graceful perfor-
mance degradation in AI-empowered sensing applications, i.e.,
model training/inference tasks are tolerant to moderate errors
in data/feature transmission with minuscule performance loss
thanks to the inherent robustness of AI models. In this section,
we review the advancements in developing AirComp-based
techniques for ISEA, ranging from fundamental system design
to RRM to practicality issues.
A. AirComp-based Data Aggregation Design
Data aggregation is crucial for ISEA systems, fusing obser-
vation, knowledge, and results from edge devices to achieve
a comprehensive perception. AirComp accelerates this fusion
process by integrating the fusion computation into commu-
nication, leveraging the waveform superposition property of
wireless multi-access channels. The involved AirComp tech-
niques, based on the desired functional form, can be classified
into nomographic and non-nomographic function computation
methods.
1) Nomographic Data Aggregation: Nomographic func-
tions are a set of multivariate functions that can be represented
as a post-processed function over the sum of pre-processed
functions of individual variables. Its instances commonly used
26
TABLE III
SUMMARY OF RELATED WORKS ON AIRCOMP-BASED AIR INTERFACE FOR ISEA
Approaches
Ref.
Sensing Scenario
Performance
Metrics
Key Contribution
AirComp-based
Data Aggregation
Design
[78]
Multi-modal sensors collect raw data and
upload them to the server
MSE
Propose AirComp with transmit power control and receive beamforming in a
MIMO system for fast sensory data aggregation
[79]
Sensory feature aggregation via AirComp
for average-pooling
Sensing (inference)
uncertainty
Propose a theoretical framework for quantifying the performance of multi-view
sensing and figure out its relations to system parameters
[145] Sensory data aggregation using AirComp in
a multi-cell network
MSE
Investigates optimal interference management policies to minimize the MSE in
aggregated signals received at different APs.
[146] Sensory data aggregation with peak-power
constraints
MSE, peak power
Optimize the transmitting-receiving policy under the peak power constraints to
minimize the aggregation MSE
[147] Sensory data aggregation with sum-power
constraints
MSE, sum power
Optimize the transmitting-receiving policy, under the sum power constraints, to
minimize the MSE of aggregated signals at the receiver
[148] AirComp of spatial-and-temporal correlated
signals
MSE
Propose a low-complexity AirComp policy for achieving the minimum MSE
[149] RIS-assisted AirComp in single-cell IoT
network
MSE
Joint design of AirComp transceivers and RIS phase-shifts to minimize distortion
[150] Sensory feature aggregation via AirComp
for max-pooling
Classification accu-
racy, MSE
A generalized AirComp framework for the max-function computation of features
among sensors and its optimization
[151]
BS and intelligent omni surfaces cooperate
for joint multi-target sensing and multi-user
communication
Sensing SINR, data
rate
Jointly optimize radar receive vector, transmit beamforming, and IOS coefficients
to maximize the SINR of the multi-target under a data rate constraint.
RRM
[152] FL data aggregation with AirComp over
broadband channels
AirComp SNR, sen-
sor truncation ratio
Derives the tradeoffs between communication and learning metrics in truncated
channel inversion
[153] Sensory data aggregation with AirComp
over fading channels
MSE,
average
power
Optimal threshold-based power control for static channels and regularized channel
inversion for time-varying channels
[154] Over-the-air FL data aggregation
MSE
Optimal power control with heterogeneous gradient statistics
[155] Over-the-air FL gradient aggregation
Convergence rate
Convergence analysis of AirComp-based gradient aggregation and comparison
with digital transmission
[156] Over-the-air distributed PCA over noisy
fading channels
Convergence speed,
power consumption
Region-aware adaptive power control that exploits channel noise to escape saddle
points
[157] Over-the-air FL data aggregation with a
multi-antenna edge server
Number of sched-
uled sensors
Jointly optimizes the receive beamforming and sensor scheduling to maximize the
number of active sensors under error constraints
[158] Over-the-air FL gradient aggregation
Convergence rate
Dynamic and decentralized sensor scheduling considering CSI, local gradient and
accumulated residual gradients
[159] Over-the-air FL gradient aggregation
Convergence rate
Gradient and channel aware device scheduling that trades off between sensor
quantity and quality with multi-objective optimization
[160] Over-the-air FL gradient aggregation
Convergence rate
Probabilistic device scheduling using channel and gradient importance
[61]
Broadband over-the-air fusion of spatial
features
Minimum
receive
SNR
Optimal pairing of voxel-level subtasks and subcarrier to leverage feature sparsity
and channel diversity
[161] IT users and AirComp FL users sharing
broadband channels
IT rate, FL conver-
gence rate
An online subcarrier allocation algorithm to maximize the IT rate with FL
convergence guarantees
[162] Broadband AirComp for general data aggre-
gation
MSE
Designs a broadband AirComp scheme where each sensors broadcast over multiple
subcarriers to exploit diversity
Practical
AirComp
[163] AirComp in two cells with inter-cell inter-
ference
AirComp
degrees-
of-freedom
A simultaneous signal-and-interference alignment scheme for interference man-
agement
[164] Multi-cluster AirComp
MSE
Distributed transceiver design to suppress interference
[165] Over-the-air FL under interference
Convergence rate
Cascades gradient pruning and spread spectrum to suppress interference without
bandwidth expansion with optimized tradeoff
[166] Over-the-air FL under Byzantine attacks
Convergence rate
Implememt one-bit gradient quantization and majority vote to enhance robustness
against Byzantine attackers
[167] Wireless sensor network with function com-
putation of measurements
Function estimation
error
Propose an analog computation scheme that allows for an efficient estimate of
linear and nonlinear functions
[168] Sensory data aggregation using AirComp
and RIS with imperfect CSI
MSE
Propose a framework utilizing RIS to assist the AirComp-based data aggregation
with imperfect CSI
[169] Sensory data aggregation using AirComp
and RIS with imperfect CSI
MSE
Optimized transceiver design for RIS-assisted AirComp with imperfect CSI and
power constraints
[170] A wireless sensor network with multiple
sensor nodes for data collection
Function estimation
error
Proposes a blind AirComp without requiring CSI access for low complexity and
low latency data aggregation
[171] Over-the-air FL gradient aggregation
Convergence rate
Propose one-bit broadband digital AirComp for the aggregation high-dimensional
stochastic gradients
[172] Sensory data aggregation using AirComp
MSE
A framework for digital AirComp with digital modulation of data points and
optimized bit-slicing for bit allocation between symbols
[173]
Distributing sampling and computing of
spectrum sensing to multiple sensor nodes
for cognitive radio
Relative reconstruc-
tion MSE
Propose a cooperative wideband spectrum sensing scheme using AirComp for the
summation of Fourier transform and establish a demo on the platform of USRP
[174] Sensory data aggregation using AirComp
MSE
Real-time implementation of sensor AirComp achieved by using SDR nodes and
extensive tests
[175] Over-the-air FL gradient aggregation
Training loss
Propose a two-stage waveform pre-equalization technique and a protocol for over-
the-air FL with hardware implementations
[176] Sensory data aggregation using AirComp
for environment perception
Computation error
Implementation and evaluation of AirComp over 15 hardware sensor nodes
[177] Sensory data aggregation using AirComp
Computation error
Establish a testbed using SDSDR devices to validate the AirComp-based sensory
data aggregation
in ISEA include weighted sum, arithmetic mean, geometric
mean, Euclidean norm, and polynomials. The weighted sum,
for example, is employed in FL for gradient aggregation
[152] and model fusion and multi-view sensing for feature
pooling [150], [175]. This decomposable property lays the
foundation for AirComped nomographic functions in ISEA.
The pre-processed functions specified by ISEA tasks are
offloaded to edge devices, of which the results are transmitted
27
to the edge server simultaneously, forming a noisy sum of pre-
processed functions through wave superposition. Finally, the
desired nomographic function is reconstructed with channel
distortions by feeding the received signal into its correspond-
ing post-processing operation. To control the effects of channel
noise, the parameters in the pre/post-processing algorithms
will be tweaked according to system resources and functional
properties, such as bandwidth, transmit power budget, chan-
nel fading, channel correlation, and signal correlation (see,
e.g., [146]–[148]).
ISEA also involves the computation of high-dimensional
nomographic functions, where the input and output of Air-
Comp consist of high-dimensional vectors, such as vector-
matrix multiplication leveraged in fully connected layers of
neural networks. The input vector, consisting of the output
features of the preceding layer, is multiplied by a trained ma-
trix and passed through an activation function to obtain a new
representation of features. In AirComp-based ISEA, the input
vector is distributed over multiple devices and MIMO Air-
Comp allows the desired vector-matrix multiplication achieved
over the air [178]. The core of MIMO AirComp is to create
effective channel gains of space-frequency channels, through
precoding and receiving methods, equivalent to the matrix
elements of the matrix-vector multiplication specified by ISEA
tasks. Furthermore, researchers also resort to reconfigurable
intelligent surfaces (RIS) to directly manipulate the physical
channels by programming the phase shifts of RIS [179],
which has the potential to improve the implementation of
AirComp [149].
2) Non-nomographic Data Aggregation: While the nomo-
graphic function computation dominates the computation tasks
of ISEA, its non-nomographic counterpart, such as general
non-linear operations, may also be used in sensory data
aggregation. One outstanding example is the max-pooling
operation of multi-view sensing, which computes the element-
wise maximum of features distributed across devices. Its
integration into AirComp requires not only the aforementioned
pre-processing and post-processing in nomographic functions
but also a functional approximation due to its lack of decom-
posable property. To address this issue, the vector p-norm
occurred in previous works for over-the-air approximation
of the max function [150]. Such approximation inevitably
results in a tradeoff between the approximation error and noise
amplification.
3) End-to-End Signal Processing: It should be empha-
sized that ISEA applications always require the integration
of AirComp-based computation and subsequent complicated
computation, such as distributed analytics and estimation. For
example, in multi-view sensing with MVCNN architecture,
the local features can be fused into a global feature map
via average or max pooling. The obtained global feature
is then taken as input to the following classifier for final
classification. To optimize the E2E performance, AirComp
processing algorithms should be designed using E2E metric
optimization rather than minimizing the AirComp error. To
address this issue, primary efforts have been made to char-
acterize the E2E accuracy in terms of error metrics, such
as discriminant gain, Mahalanobis distance, and MSE, using
the theory of classification margin, information theory, and
estimation [79], [150]. These studies lay a preliminary theo-
retical foundation for performance evaluation and algorithm
design for AirComp-based ISEA. Moreover, the architecture
of FL can be employed to propose a joint design of dynamic
learning rate and AirComp transceiver [151]. This design
enables the learning rate to adapt to the time-varying wireless
environment, achieving an importance-aware distortion control
that enhances the learning performance.
B. Radio Resource Management
While the above signal processing pipelines and perfor-
mance analysis enable AirComp for ISEA, it still encounters
several challenges in realistic settings, such as hostile chan-
nel states, inter-cell interference, heterogeneous computation
capabilities, and data quality across devices. Combating these
issues to optimize the E2E sensing performance requires task-
oriented RRM throughout the AirComp process. The existing
literature develops various schemes in aspects such as power
control, sub-carrier assignment, sensor scheduling, and inter-
ference management schemes to optimize E2E performance
metrics or their tractable surrogates, as illustrated in Fig. 7 (b)
and reviewed in detail below.
1) Power Control: Power control is critical for sensors
subject to stringent battery-life and peak-power constraints.
Classical AirComp power control aims at MSE minimization
assuming independent data streams for either instantaneous
[146], [153] or total power constraints [147]. However, in the
ISEA context, these classical schemes become sub-optimal as
some assumptions and metrics need to be revised for sensing.
The first reason is the non-IID and non-ergodic distribution
of sensory data as a natural result of sensor positions and
mobility. For example, [154] takes the gradient statistics into
consideration, which may vary across sensors and communi-
cation rounds. With the gradient mean and variance known,
the optimal power control policy for MSE minimization,
depending on channel gain, noise power and gradient statistics,
is derived in closed form. A practical adaptive power control
scheme is designed when the current gradient statistics are
unknown via parameter estimation with historical statistics.
As the second reason, although MSE is shown to be loosely
relevant to the downstream task performance in ISEA, for
example, learning convergence speed [155] and inference
accuracy [150], optimization for MSE is still inherently sub-
optimal for ISEA tasks. Direct orientation towards the E2E
metric yields more efficient power control scheme by, e.g.,
optimally trading off between sensor inclusion and aggregation
reliability [152]. In [180], an ISEA inference scenario is
targeted where multiple devices equipped with RF sensing
hardware participate in feature AirComp for inference at the
fusion center. To enable E2E optimization, the minimum
pairwise discriminant gain is analyzed and formalized as
the optimization objective of joint power allocation, transmit
precoding, and receive beamforming. The proposed scheme,
leveraging successive convex approximation, allows resource
allocation in terms of both channel states and feature im-
portance. Interestingly, the AirComp noise, which classical
28
power control aims to suppress, can be even beneficial for
the downstream task. In [156], the authors study over-the-
air principal component analysis and discover that the per-
turbation to aggregated gradient caused by channel noise can
assist the escaping from saddle points, rendering gradient MSE
minimization inappropriate in saddle regions. For this reason, a
region-adaptive power control scheme is then designed, which
suppresses noise in non-stationary regions but reduces the
power level within the saddle region to exploit the effect of
noise.
2) Data- and Channel-Aware Sensor Scheduling: From
the communication perspective, it is well-known that the
aggregation MSE of AirComp is limited by sensors suffering
from deep fading, calling for sensor scheduling based on
channel states. For example, the prevalent truncated channel
inversion scheme, which assigns zero power to sensors in
deep fading, can be viewed as a sensor scheduling mechanism
based on a channel threshold [152]. On the other hand,
from the computing perspective, sensor scheduling should
take into account the importance of heterogeneous data across
sensors. Generic data-importance metrics include distance to
supporting hyperplane, entropy, and gradient norm for FL, as
well as discriminant gain and contribution estimators based
on first-order expansion. Depending on the ISEA application
scenario, data importance can be further complemented by
sensing-relevant metadata such as location, view angle, and
sensing coverage. Oriented towards AirComp-based ISEA per-
formance, sensor scheduling shall integrate data and channel
awareness. The relevant works are introduced below.
Observing that the convergence performance of FL im-
proves with the number of participating sensors, the authors
in [157] have formulated the AirComp sensor scheduling
problem as joint sensor selection and receive beamforming to
maximize the number of scheduled sensors under an MSE re-
quirement and power constraints, which is further transformed
into a sparse and low-rank optimization. The authors then
propose an algorithm based on difference-of-convex functions
programming with near-optimal performance. In [158], the
authors first propose a dynamic residual feedback mechanism
to combat data distortion, where sensors, instead of discarding
the local gradient when not scheduled for transmission, record
historical gradients and transmit a weighted sum of the current
and accumulated gradient when being scheduled. Then, a
decentralized optimization framework based on the Lyapunov
drift optimization methods is constructed to optimize the
sensor scheduling and power control, adapting to both channel
states and gradient importance. By also adopting the resid-
ual feedback mechanism, the authors in [159] formulate the
sensor scheduling problem as a multi-objective optimization
problem with the tradeoff between scheduling more sensors
and device quality maximization, where the latter is measured
by the sum of a designed quality indicator comprising data
qualities, channel gains, and energy consumptions, and then
proposed a dynamic scheduling algorithm based on Lyapunov
optimization. In [160], the authors study probabilistic device
scheduling to resolve the bias issue in deterministic scheduling
policies and propose an algorithm considering both channel
conditions and gradient importance. For ISEA inference, [61]
designed an over-the-air feature fusion protocol involving a
sparsity pattern feedback phase to identify sensors with empty
voxel feature vectors, which are thus excluded from AirComp.
Subsequently, the optimal power control is derived in closed
form.
3) Subcarrier Allocation: To overcome the challenges of
high-throughput fusion of high dimensional gradients/features,
AirComp in ISEA is expected to operate on multiple sub-
carriers in a broadband system in the forms of multiplexing,
where the aggregation of each dimension/task is assigned to
one of the subcarriers [152], diversity, where one symbol is
simultaneously transmitted on several carriers, or a mixture
of both. In view of the coexistence of data/task heterogeneity
and different channel fades on different subcarriers, optimizing
subcarrier allocation can significantly boost the AirComp
performance. In [161], the authors consider the co-existence
of information-transfer (IT) users and AirComp FL users in a
broadband system sharing broadband channels, resulting in a
subcarrier allocation problem between the two sets of users,
which aims to maximize the IT rate subject to a guaranteed FL
convergence rate. The convergence rate constraint is translated
into a minimum number of subcarriers assigned for FL, based
on which an online subcarrier allocation algorithm is designed.
In [61], an environment perception task is considered, which
exhibits heterogeneous feature sparsity patterns across sensors.
The designed AirFusion protocol uses a feedback process
to enable awareness of sensor-wise sparsity on each voxel
dimension and design a set of algorithms to optimally pair
voxels with subcarriers such that the sparsity pattern matches
the channel gain pattern. Exploiting broadband channels for
diversity, [162] considers an AirComp system where each
sensor broadcasts its data simultaneously on multiple subcar-
riers, and the server estimates the aggregated data using the
received signal on all subcarriers. An optimization problem
to determine the subcarriers to transmit on and the invested
power for each sensor is formulated and solved by alternating
minimization.
C. Practical AirComp
Despite many well-established theories and algorithms for
AirComp, there is still a gap between theoretical assumptions
and real-world conditions when deploying AirComp in prac-
tical ISEA systems. In this subsection, the existing solutions
for addressing the implementation issues are reviewed in the
aspects of robustness, compatibility, and prototype validation.
1) Robust AirComp:
ISEA tasks, such as autonomous
driving and robotics, are mission-critical, imposing stringent
robustness requirements on ISEA algorithms in the face of
non-ideal environments in practice. However, the common
assumptions adopted by algorithm design, including perfect
device synchronization and accurate CSI, could be inappli-
cable because of the unaffordable costs paid for feedback
bandwidth restriction and large-scale networking. For exam-
ple, time-division duplexing (TDD) mode is mainly con-
sidered in existing AirComp architecture, where the signal-
ing overhead during channel transmission can increase at a
linear rate with respect to the number of devices, leading
29
to high communication latency for massive-access networks.
To this end, robust design under imperfect CSI has been
extensively studied, with attempts made to achieve reliable
functional computation under different scenarios, such as RIS-
assisted AirComp [168], [169] and single-input-single-output
(SISO)/SIMO/MIMO AirComp [181]–[183]. By modeling
channel estimation error in either stochastic (i.e., expectation)
or deterministic (i.e., worst-case) models, robust AirComp
transceivers are designed to combat channel distortions caused
by erroneous channel feedback. Additionally, the authors
in [170] have developed a CSI-free AirComp system, leverag-
ing blind demixing to recover a sequence of signals without
accessing any CSI, thereby achieving the desired function
computation.
On the other hand, moving devices, such as vehicles and
UAVs functioning as sensors and data processors, play a
principal role in ISEA systems. These devices exhibit a strong
degree of mobility in contrast to mobile phones and fixed cam-
eras in traditional networks, rendering their wireless connec-
tion potentially asynchronous. Specifically, using existing syn-
chronization techniques in 4G/5G standards, the resulting time
offset is inversely proportional to the leveraged bandwidth.
This matter can be of crucial significance for AirComp-based
ISEA since AirComp depends on synchronization among
sensors to attain accurate wave superposition. To combat this
issue, some research efforts have been made. As exemplified
by [167], the random sequence technique is employed to trans-
mit sensor data, thereby effectively countering misalignment
in wave superposition. Signal processing methods can also
be employed to control coarse synchronization. For instance,
[184] uses a maximum-likelihood estimation approach to
eliminate channel distortion caused by channel-gain variation
and device asynchrony.
In addition, AirComp performance is prone to interference
from jammers or neighboring cells, which may lead to sudden
drops in the sensing task performance, i.e., AI outage. A
set of RRM techniques has been developed for interference
management. In [163], a scheme called simultaneous signal-
and-interference alignment is proposed to manage inference in
a two-cell system. It divides the MIMO channel space into an
interference alignment space and signal alignment space, and
by constraining the interference into the former, the number of
interference-free dimensions for AirComp can be maximized.
In [145], the centralized power control problem for a multi-cell
AirComp network is tackled by profiling the Pareto front of
multi-cell MSEs and solving a sequence of second-order cone
programming problems, and a distributed algorithm designed
by exploiting the interference temperature technique. For
multicluster networks, [164] developed a centralized branch-
and-bound algorithm and a distributed algorithm for the
transceiver optimization for transceiver design to minimize
the aggregation MSE accounting for both signal misalignment
error and interference. A novel technique, termed spectrum
breathing, is developed in [165], which features cascaded
gradient pruning and spread spectrum to reduce interference
under a given bandwidth budget. In addition, in [166], one-
bit gradient quantization and majority-vote aggregation have
been proposed in over-the-air FL systems to counter Byzantine
attacks.
2) Digital AirComp: Traditional AirComp architecture is
mainly based on uncoded analog transmission and waveform
superposition of linearly modulated symbols. This indicates
that analog AirComp can ensure average error performance
but may fail to safeguard crucial sensory features for mission-
critical ISEA tasks. Inspired by this, digital AirComp is
put forward to protect data aggregation from channel ad-
versity through nonlinear modulation and coding techniques.
The approaches of integrating AirComp with existing dig-
ital techniques mainly consist of regarding AirComp as a
special type of channel, encoding operations, or mapping
between finite fields [172]. Consequently, the designed com-
putation/aggregation results can be retrieved by proposing sig-
nal processing techniques such as maximum-likelihood (ML)
decoders or detectors [185]–[189]. In these studies, nested
lattice coding has the potential to achieve data aggregation
with digital AirComp as its inherent linearity guarantees the
decodability of coded data [185], [186]. Additionally, the au-
thors in [189] have developed a framework of digital AirComp
with Low Density Parity Check Code (LDPC) coded data ag-
gregation over non-orthogonal OFDM subcarriers, along with
joint channel decoding and aggregation decoders customized
for convolutional and LDPC codes.
It is worth noting that digital AirComp presents a natural
tradeoff between reliability and latency. At the expense of
data rate reduction, reliable data aggregation is facilitated by a
digital scheme featuring high-precision quantization and low-
rate coding. This renders it feasible to flexibly adapt digital
AirComp’s coding, quantization, and modulation strategies
to ISEA applications with diverse latency-reliability require-
ments. For instance, [171] proposes a one-bit AirComp scheme
that quantizes the coefficients of stochastic gradient uploaded
by each device into single bits. It is shown in [171] that
such one-bit AirComp can achieve low latency for gradient
aggregation while allowing for the resulting quantization errors
satisfactory for FL tasks. The data importance also involves
the latency-reliability tradeoff. [190] has demonstrated that
optimizing the power control and compression ratio, based
on the convergence effect of quantization and sparsification in
different layers, can achieve the fastest convergence rate.
3) Demo Development:
To validate the feasibility and
effectiveness of AirComp in real-world scenarios, several
prototypes have been developed in several platforms including
Universal Software Radio Peripheral (USRP) [173], [174],
[189], Xilinx Software-Defined Radio [175], Wireless Sensor
Network [176], and Self-developed Software Defined Radio
(SDSDR) [177]. For instance, to demonstrate the concepts of
AirComp-assisted FL, [189] and [177] have respectively lever-
aged the USRP and SDSDR platforms to verify the effective-
ness of proposed transmission AirComp schemes. In [177], the
authors establish a testbed using SDSDR devices to validate
a transmission scheme proposed in [167], where the testbed
includes one antenna configured as the function computation
and others emulating separate single-antenna sensor nodes.
Additionally, the authors in [176] validate their proposed
transmission scheme, which encodes values into Poisson-
distributed burst sequences to perform mathematical functions
30
Edge server
IoT sensors
Air interface
Sensory data 
collection
Perception 
results
On-sensor computation
Wireless aggregation
On-server computation
One-shot 
communication
-and-
computing
On-the-fly 
communication
-and-
computing
End-to-end 
latency
Fig. 9.
Compared to one-shot communication and computation, on-the-fly techniques decompose the sequential processing of high-dimensional data into
streaming operations with low-dimensional communication and computation, thereby significantly reducing the E2E latency of ISEA.
via AirComp, using a wireless sensor network platform with
15 simple nodes and a central receiver.
VIII. ADVANCED SIGNAL PROCESSING FOR INTEGRATED
SENSING AND EDGE AI
Signal processing is a crucial component in ISEA, serving,
e.g., pre-processing of raw sensory datasets, noise removal,
and compression before input to the air interface, as well
as signal detection and multi-view multi-modal fusion at the
receiver. While traditional analog and digital signal process-
ing typically aims at the best reconstruction of the carried
data, advanced signal processing techniques for ISEA shall
aim at sensing task performance with potentially multiple
objectives, such as sensing accuracy, E2E latency, and privacy.
This section reviews the research efforts on advanced signal
processing techniques and frameworks, focusing on several
emerging aspects during the evolution to ISEA within 6G.
These aspects include on-the-fly communication and com-
puting (FlyCom2), multi-functional waveforms, and privacy-
preserving techniques.
A. On-the-Fly Computing and Communication
The existing architectures of ISEA primarily rely on a
framework that separates high-dimensional computing and
communication processes. For instance, in split ISEA, inter-
mediate features are extracted from extensive on-device data
using AI models deployed on edge devices. These features
are then transmitted to a central server for global detection.
However, this sequential approach to computation and commu-
nication presents two main drawbacks regarding E2E latency
and computation constraints. First, the E2E latency in ISEA,
composed of computing and communication latency, may
not meet the stringent latency requirements of time-sensitive
applications. Second, this architecture imposes heavy com-
putation requirements, including memory and complexity, on
edge devices. In ISEA, sensory data collected by sensors can
consist of several million data points, such as LiDAR-based
environmental perception. The large volume of data makes it
challenging for lightweight local sensors to perform feature
extraction and other data analytics operations. Additionally,
executing complex and energy-consuming computation tasks
at sensors in a large-scale sensor network is undesirable due
to considerations of network lifetime and energy efficiency.
The above challenges stemming from high-dimensional
computation and communication can be addressed by the
innovative framework of FlyCom2 [191], [218]. As illustrated
in Fig. 9, the main idea behind this framework is to break
down the sequential processing of high-dimensional data into
streaming operations of low-dimensional communication-and-
computing. The concept of FlyCom2 was initially intro-
duced in [191], where a FlyCom framework was developed
for distributed tensor decomposition (DTD) in distributed
data analytics. The proposed FlyCom2 offers several solu-
tions to the aforementioned issues. First, it utilizes a low-
complexity random sketching technique to reduce the com-
putational complexity of on-device processing. This approach
allows for efficient computation on edge devices. Second, the
E2E performance of an ISEA system incorporating FlyCom2
continuously improves as the framework accumulates low-
dimensional local sketches. These sketches are leveraged by
the server to infer patterns in the distributed dataset. Conse-
quently, FlyCom2 exhibits graceful degradation due to link
disruptions or packet losses. Third, FlyCom2 enables paral-
lel streaming communication and computation, which halves
latency compared to the sequential operations of traditional
one-shot algorithms.
Despite the potential to improve efficiency and reduce on-
device computation constraints, the development of FlyCom2
in ISEA is still nascent. In essence, FlyCom2 represents
leveraging incremental operations of parallel computing and
31
TABLE IV
SUMMARY OF RELATED WORKS ON ADVANCED SIGNAL PROCESSING FOR ISEA
Approaches
Ref.
Sensing Scenario
Performance
Metrics
Key Contribution
FlyCom2
[191] Sensors capture raw data as tensors for
fusion and PCA
Decomposition error
Propose a framework of FlyCom2 for DTD of local sensory datasets with streaming
computation and progressive global aggregation
[192] Image applications requiring features
extracted from raw images
Average recall, aver-
age precision
Exploit the inherent pyramidal hierarchy of deep convolutional networks to construct
feature pyramids
[193] LiDAR-based 3D object detection
Average precision
Propose an Octree-based Transformer to capture sufficient features from large scale 3D
scenes
[194]
LiDAR sensors collect point cloud
streams transmitted and stored within
limited data volume
Average precision
A compression algorithm that exploits spatio-temporal relationships across multiple
LiDAR sweeps to reduce the storage of LiDAR sensor data streams.
[195] Fusing point clouds to learn a unified
representation at a central server
MSE
Propose a FlyCom2 framework to enable PtCloud fusion with streaming processing,
progressive data uploading integrated with AirComp, and the progressive output of a
global PtCloud representation.
Multi-Functional
Waveforms
[196]
RF-Sensing shares spectrum and hard-
ware with communication in millime-
ter wave band
Spectrum
efficiency,
MSE
Overview radar-communication coexistence and dual-functional radar-communication
(DFRC) systems and propose a transceiver architecture and frame structure for a DFRC
BS
[197]
Simultaneous
communication
and
radar-sensing with unified spectrum
and transceivers
Bit error rate, average
error, MSE
Propose a code-division orthogonal frequency-division multiplex (CD-OFDM) scheme
with interference cancellation methods for joint communication and sensing
[198] A joint radar-communication system
using a dual-functional waveform
Bit error rate
Exploit orthogonal waveforms for embedding a sequence of information bits during
each radar pulse
[199] A joint radar-communication system
using a dual-functional waveform
Symbol
error
rate,
ambiguity function
Propose to use BPSK and QPSK signals for both bit modulation and pseudo-random
coded radar
[200] A
FH-MIMO
radar-based
dual-
function radar communication
MSE
Design a waveform and a estimation method for FH-MIMO receivers to estimate the
frequency hopping sequence and channel parameters
[201] A radar system with dual-functional
LFM signals
Ambiguity function
proposes to generate a sensing-communication compatible waveform by modulating
LFM signal by minimum shift keying.
[202] A joint radar-communication system
using a dual-functional waveform
Bit error rate
Exploit the combination of LFM signals and continuous phase modulation signals for
simultaneous data transmission and target detection
[203]
An uplink system with a full-duplex
BS illuminating an imaging scene
while receiving data from a user
Degrees of freedom
Propose a unified signal space analysis framework based on the degrees of freedom
metric to characterize the trade-offs between sensing (imaging) and communication
[204]
ISAC with a unified dual-functional
waveform for simultaneous communi-
cation and sensing
Data
rate,
Cram´er-
Rao bound
Analyze the fundamental sensing-communication tradeoff under a Guassian channel
based on the tool of Cram´er-Rao bound (CRB)-Rate region
[16]
An MIMO-radar system which com-
municates with downlink users and
detects radar targets simultaneously
Sum data rate, radar
detection probability,
MSE
Design a dual-functional waveform for MIMO radar, controlling the tradeoff between
radar and communications performance
[205]
An MIMO-radar system which com-
municates with downlink users and
detects radar targets simultaneously
SNR, peak-sidelobe-
ratio, MSE
Propose a unified waveform omited by transmit array incoporating radar probing
beampartterns as well as communication signals
[206]
MIMO radar with full-duplex hybrid
beamforming for both sensing and
communication
Transmitter
radar
power
Optimize the transmit beamforming with concurrent multiple beams for communication
and sensing and mitigate cross-interference therein
[207] Multi-target localization from a signal
data stream
Signal-to-clutter-
plus-noise ratio
Design a precoder to maximize multicasting rate while maximizing the radar SCNR
[208] Multi-user and multi-target ISAC
Sum rate, sensing er-
ror
Utilize constructive interference to combat multi-user interference and design ISAC
waveforms to achieve the optimal Pareto front
[209]
Simultaneous communication with an
OFDM receiver and target parameters
detection
Cram´er-Rao
bound,
data rate
Optimize subcarrier powers in a time-frequency region of interest to realize a perfor-
mance trade-off between radar and communications
Privacy-Preserving
Signal Processing
for ISEA
[210] Multiple servers cooperate for linear
inference requests from sensors
Latency
A coding scheme based on Shamir’s secret sharing to ensure that the original data
cannot be recovered from the colluding servers
[211] Split ISEA inference
DP, data utility
Preserve privacy by a data minimization model and adaptive noise
[212] Split ISEA inference
DP, accuracy
Preserve privacy by a feature encryptor trained without exposing ground-true labels to
the server
[213] Over-the-air FL data aggregation
DP, convergence rate
Adaptive power allocation for orthogonal and AirComp FL with privacy guarantee and
conditions for privacy without performance loss
[214] Over-the-air collaborative inference
DP, accuracy
Over-the-air ensemble inference with model privacy guarantee
[215] Over-the-air FL gradient aggregation
DP, convergence rate
Adaptive noise injection per-device to achieve a desired DP level
[216] Over-the-air collaborative inference
DP, accuracy
Feature-aware device selection followed by noise injection to preserve privacy
[217] Over-the-air FL gradient aggregation
DP, convergence rate
Random data dimension reduction for privacy amplification and power control scheme
robust to CSI attacks
communication to improve system performance continuously.
This implies that in particular ISEA tasks, the involved data
processing algorithms and air interface techniques shall be
jointly designed based on task-specific requirements and prop-
erties. Several examples are introduced below.
• FlyCom2 with large language model (LLM) fine-
tuning: With human-like perception and understanding
capabilities, LLMs are expected to be vital for supporting
intelligent sensing tasks. In this case, parameter-efficient
fine-tuning is always required to customize LLMs to par-
ticular sensing requirements, where a popular technique is
to formulate a prompt ensemble [219]. It has been shown
in [218] that such a prompt ensemble, which comprises a
set of lightweight prompts, can be boosted progressively
via incremental prompt transfer and combination. This
inspires the proposal of on-the-fly boosting (FlyBoosting)
to progressively broaden the range of solvable problems
of a prompt ensemble, thereby realizing communication-
and-computation efficient multi-device device-edge co-
operative fine-tuning (DEFT). Among others, to further
32
enhance efficiency, goal-oriented communication tech-
niques, such as importance-aware scheduling and re-
source allocation, can be designed based on the effec-
tiveness scores of individual prompts and communication
conditions of participants (e.g., sensors and servers).
• FlyCom2 with hierarchical feature extraction: There
are various neural network architectures and AI mod-
els that facilitate coarse-to-fine pattern recognition and
semantic image synthesis by using hierarchical feature
extraction. Examples of such models include MUSH and
Pyramid [192]. These models enable incremental compu-
tation, making them suitable for developing a FlyCom2
framework for ISEA.
• FlyCom2 with tree-structured data processing: Sparse
data processing commonly utilizes tree-structured repre-
sentations to encode the data space in a compact form.
Examples of such representations include octrees and k-
dimensional (KD) trees, which are widely employed to
describe point clouds in a 3D space [193]–[195]. Analyz-
ing data over these tree structures involves incremental
operations such as tree search, data compression, and
feature extraction.
In typical ISEA scenarios, efficient collaborative sensing
is essential. In this context, by leveraging FlyCom2’s
ability to decompose sequential high-dimensional data
processing into streaming operations of low-dimensional
communication and computation, the incremental pro-
cessing of tree-structured data can be efficiently per-
formed in a distributed manner, facilitating collaborative
sensing and analysis among multiple sensors.
• FlyCom2 with online algorithms: Indeed, there is a set
of online algorithms specifically designed to handle the
continuous arrival of data points. They feature immediate
decision-making based on the currently available data
without requiring access to the entire dataset, thereby
supporting real-time scenarios. For example, the random
sketching technique used in [191] was originally pro-
posed to learn principal components from the contin-
uous streams of data vectors [220]. The integration of
online algorithms with the FlyCom2 framework allows
for ultra-low-latency processing and transmission of real-
time sensory data, making it well-suited for dynamic
ISEA scenarios such as healthcare, autonomous driving,
and AR/VR.
B. ISEA with Multi-Functional Waveforms
From a physical layer perspective, advancing ISEA criti-
cally relies on the foundational design of waveforms. Multi-
functional waveforms are sophisticated signal designs that
integrate multiple functions, such as sensing, communication,
localization, and radar, into a unified structure, leveraging
advanced signal processing to optimize performance. Previous
attempts in this field focused on extending the functionalities
of existing systems. For example, communication symbols
were modulated onto traditional radar waveforms, such as
space-time coding over orthogonal radar waveforms, code
shift keying using optimized coded radar signals, and em-
bedding communication symbols in frequency-hopping multi-
input multi-output (FH-MIMO) radar systems [198]–[200].
Some early works in this field explored the performance
of sensing using signals generated through linear frequency
modulation (LFM) and continuous phase modulation [201],
[202]. These schemes aimed to utilize existing architectures
to meet the limited demands of additional functionalities.
More recent research focuses on the novel design of multi-
functional waveforms for simultaneous monostatic sensing and
communication (SMSC). In SMSC, a transceiver array emits
dual-functional signals to illuminate the scene and gather envi-
ronmental information through echo signals. At the same time,
forward signals are reflected to a communication receiver for
information delivery. The advantage of SMSC is that it allows
the uncertainty of communication messages to be incorporated
into the transmitted waveforms without compromising the
coherent processing of monostatic sensing. This eliminates the
need for cooperation overhead [203]. However, the distinct
requirements of sensing and communication pose challenges
in the design of multi-function waveforms, such as the Cram´er-
Rao bound (CRB) and data rates, leading to a tradeoff in
performance [203], [221]. To address these tradeoffs, research
has focused on beamforming techniques, where beam patterns
are formed in a joint radar-communication MIMO system
based on the directions of sensing targets and communication
users to mitigate mutual interference [16], [205]–[207]. In
multi-user and multi-target scenarios, multi-user interference
is a critical challenge, which is addressed in [208] by intro-
ducing constructive interference. Additionally, time-frequency
waveforms have been revisited to optimize subcarrier powers
in a specific time-frequency region of interest, achieving a
favorable performance tradeoff between radar and communi-
cations [209].
Integrating advanced AI algorithms with multi-functional
waveforms, ISEA is able to enhance both sensing and com-
munications in a variety of ways. First, AI models can be lever-
aged to extract valuable information from sensory data gath-
ered by multi-functional waveforms (e.g., intelligent micro-
Doppler signature detection and radio map construction). Sec-
ond, AI-assisted sensing and communication frameworks offer
diverse E2E performance metrics—including accuracy, IoU,
semantic data rate, as well as traditional measures like CRB,
ambiguity functions, and throughput—to holistically guide
waveform design and system development. Finally, certain AI
algorithms, such as reinforcement learning and deep unfolding,
can effectively address the complex tradeoff between sensing
and communication, a challenge that is often intractable using
conventional analytical optimization techniques.
C. Privacy-Preserving Signal Processing in ISEA
Privacy issues arise with the frequency of sensory data
exchange among different entities in ISEA. The sensing data
security and privacy in networks received early attention when
the embedded sensing is implanted into personal devices, e.g.,
mobile phones [222], and architectural and protocol designs
were discussed in different sensing scenarios such as smart
cities [223], IoTs [224], and mobile crowdsensing systems
33
[225]. In ISEA, a major challenge is to design privacy-
preserving signal processing schemes to desensitize sensory
data such that the sensing task performance requirement can
be achieved with minimum privacy leakage. It is notable that
compared with uploading raw data, the split ISEA paradigm,
where sensors need to upload extracted features to the edge
brain for inference, is inherently advantageous in privacy-
preserving as the features are generally more abstract than
raw data. Nevertheless, these features are still prone to mul-
tiple types of malicious attacks, e.g., model inversion attacks
attempting to recover the original data [226].
To alleviate the privacy issue, multiple privacy-preserving
techniques have been developed for digital air interface-based
split ISEA. [210] considers split ISEA with multiple honest-
but-curious edge servers to cooperate to complete linear in-
ference requests from multiple sensors. To achieve privacy
preservation, the data is divided into pieces for distributed
computation at multiple servers, and a coding scheme based
on Shamir’s secret sharing is applied to ensure that the
original data cannot be recovered from the collision of a
number of servers. Apart from traditional signal processing,
e.g., coding, one popular approach is to use deep encoders to
transform the sensory data into a less sensitive representation
and then, optionally, inject additional distortion. For example,
EdgeSanitizer, proposed in [211], tackles the privacy issue
in split inference by applying a data minimization model to
the raw features to obtain less sensitive features, followed by
injecting adaptive Laplacian noise. More noises are injected to
feature dimensions less relevant to the inference performance.
Theoretical analysis shows that this scheme can satisfy a
given level of differential privacy (DP) while guaranteeing
data utility. In another framework named Roulette [212], a
similar procedure is proposed where the sensor model is both
a feature extractor and an encryptor with the uploaded data
further obscured by a noise injector. In addition, the authors
design a novel split-learning procedure for training the sensor
model without exposing either the input data or the ground
truth label to the server.
Intriguingly, data aggregation by AirComp is inherently
more privacy-preserving than by orthogonal access, as the
superposition of signals from multiple sensors, distorted with
channel noise, conceals individual private information [227].
Theoretically, it is proved in [213] that AirComp-based FL can
achieve a certain DP level “for free”, i.e., without affecting
the learning performance, thereby outperforming orthogonal
access. For split ISEA inference, it is also shown in [214]
that AirComp-based ensemble inference achieves much better
accuracy compared with orthogonal access while guaranteeing
model DP. Nevertheless, when the desired privacy level is
beyond what can be achieved by channel noise and signal
superposition, additional signal processing methods shall be
introduced to AirComp-based data aggregation. In [215],
the authors propose a DP-guaranteeing AirComp scheme
where each sensor individually controls the noise added to
its gradient to achieve a desired DP level. The level of
individually injected noise is derived analytically considering
gradient randomness. In a cooperative ISEA scenario where
multiple sensors perform feature AirComp for inference, it is
proposed in [216] to first select devices with potentially high
contributions to the accuracy and then inject Gaussian noises
to uploaded features. In addition to noise perturbation, it is
shown in [217] that random data dimension reduction with
resemblance to sparsification can further amplify privacy.
IX. ISEA WITH OTHER TRENDING ADVANCEMENTS IN 6G
Apart from the techniques mentioned above, the ISEA
performance can be boosted by other trending advancements in
6G. In this section, we provide a thorough discussion of these
opportunities and a review of relevant works, including the
integration of ISEA with advanced physical layer techniques,
satellite networks, and advanced networking.
A. ISEA with Advanced Physical-Layer Techniques
1) Extreme-Large-Scale
MIMO:
Extreme-large-scale
MIMO (XL-MIMO) refers to the use of a massive number of
antennas, typically in the range of hundreds or thousands, in a
wireless communication system to enable spatial multiplexing
and beamforming techniques to enhance the system capacity
and
coverage.
Specifically,
XL-MIMO
leverages
spatial
multiplexing to simultaneously serve multiple users with the
same spectrum and time resources. This improves spectral
efficiency and enables higher data rates. Moreover, with many
antennas, XL-MIMO can effectively mitigate interference by
spatially separating users and applying advanced interference
cancellation techniques. The ways of realizing XL-MIMO
include the employment of large-scale arrays, intelligent
surfaces, and distributed MIMO [228]. XL-MIMO also
reveals a property of non-stationary power distribution and
channel statistics [228], [229]. Specifically, the extreme-
large aperture of XL-MIMO renders the approximation
of plane wave propagation in traditional MIMO systems
invalid, leading to multi-antenna signal processing in the
near field [230]. On the other hand, different sub-arrays
of XL-MIMO can experience different channel fading, e.g.
line-of-sight (LOS) and non-LoS, which causes channel
non-stationarity [229].
To boost the area of ISEA, XL-MIMO can be utilized in
the following ways:
• Enhanced sensing capabilities: XL-MIMO can support
sensing purposes, such as target detection, localization,
and tracking, through its massive antenna arrays and radio
wave signal processing. For instance, using dense arrays
with high-frequency signals, e.g. millimeter waves, the
phase and amplitude information recorded over a two-
dimensional aperture to reconstruct a focused image of
a target [231]. Using the spatial resolution provided by
many antennas, XL-MIMO also improves the accuracy
and reliability of sensing applications. The angular reso-
lution achieved by dense array systems, such as MIMO
radar, has been shown to increase linearly with increasing
effective array aperture [231], [232]. In this vein, a key
challenge could be addressing the near-field beam squint
effect, the beams of different frequencies focusing at
different locations, that is caused by the vast array and
the huge bandwidth [233].
34
• Massive and cell-free sensor access: In the scenario of
densely placed sensors, traditional MIMO cannot ensure
orthogonality as sensors become indifferent in the angular
domain. However, XL-MIMO can realize beamforming
in both direction and distance in the near field, thereby
allowing simultaneous orthogonal access by a massive
number of sensors [234]. Moreover, the strong association
between the XL-MIMO channel and sensor location
can be leveraged for sensor localization and semantic-
and-channel aware sensor scheduling. Furthermore, it is
possible to leverage XL-MIMO with its powerful beam-
forming techniques to realize cell-free communication.
In a cell-free communication system, users are no longer
associated with a specific cell or BS. Instead, they can
connect to multiple APs simultaneously, forming a dy-
namic and flexible network configuration. The APs work
cooperatively to serve the users by jointly transmitting
and receiving signals. This allows for real-time analysis
and decision-making at the edge for ISEA, reducing
the latency and communication overhead associated with
transmitting raw sensor data to a centralized processing
unit.
Finally, XL-MIMO can be jointly optimized with ISEA
algorithms and protocols in terms of resource allocation,
beamforming, and signal processing. Specifically, by analyzing
the sensing and communication requirements of different
users and applications, XL-MIMO can intelligently allocate
antennas, power, and bandwidth to maximize the overall ISEA
performance.
2) Terahertz Techniques: THz techniques combine massive
bandwidth with sub-millimeter wavelengths, enabling both
ultra-high-speed data transmission and high-resolution sensing
in a single band. By unifying these capabilities within an
ISEA framework, networks can simultaneously “sense” and
“connect” their environments. Several works provide insights
into these aspects. For instance, [235] highlights THz’s strong
potential for fine-grained environmental scanning and imaging,
demonstrating how advanced machine learning algorithms can
extract meaningful insights (e.g., object detection, material
properties) in real-time. This, in turn, enables rapid decision-
making (e.g., dynamic beam adjustments) within ISEA. By
integrating camera data with THz signals, [236] shows that the
two modalities outperform the use of either modality alone:
1) cameras provide rich contextual and positional information
for THz beam selection, alignment, and movement prediction;
2) THz links offer ultra-broadband backhaul for camera feeds
while providing additional environmental-sensing capabilities
in scenarios where vision alone might fail. This bidirectional
relationship exemplifies the broader vision of ISEA, which
leverages multiple sensory modalities. Meanwhile, [237] in-
corporates object detection (e.g., people, vehicles, obstacles)
directly into the communication process to proactively mitigate
link blockages or signal degradation, thereby reflecting ISEA’s
objective of distributing AI-driven contextual information to
the network’s edges for more resilient and efficient wireless
systems.
3) Reconfigurable Intelligent Surfaces: RIS are innovative
technologies that enhance wireless communication by intelli-
gently controlling the propagation environment [238]–[240].
They can also improve the accuracy and reliability of wireless
sensing by manipulating electromagnetic waves to focus on
specific targets or areas. Specifically, integrating RIS into
ISEA extends beyond the limitations of conventional wireless
sensing by (1) creating additional LoS links for sensing, (2)
providing controllable propagation paths, and (3) enabling
adaptive RIS beam scanning [241], [242].
Building on the integration of RIS for sensing, several
research opportunities emerge:
• Optimization of RIS placement and configuration:
The deployment of RIS in sensing systems significantly
affects both sensing accuracy and communication effi-
ciency. For example, placing the RIS at a higher altitude
might establish a clearer LoS path, while a lower altitude
can reduce path loss with the sensing target. Determin-
ing the optimal RIS placement requires accounting for
environmental characteristics and dynamically adjusting
sensing coverage to reduce blind spots.
• Joint beamforming techniques: Reflection/refraction
control of the RIS must be jointly designed with con-
ventional transmit beamforming to maximize sensing
performance, rather than simply focusing on maximizing
SNR as in typical communication scenarios. For instance,
[243] demonstrates how adaptive RIS beamforming can
maximize the received signal power at RIS sensors—a
crucial metric for sensing. Moreover, via controlled re-
fraction/reflection of sensing signals, RIS allow receiving
and distinguishing echo signals from multiple targets
[244]. In general, beamforming and RIS control strategies
should be explored to balance communication efficiency
and sensing accuracy, as RIS allows manipulation of both
communication and sensing signals [245].
• Robust sensing algorithm design: In an RIS-enabled
sensing paradigm, sensors collect signals reflected from
the target for subsequent analysis. This is particularly
challenging when multiple targets must be distinguished
from overlapping signals originating from the same direc-
tion, making the estimation problem more complex than
in conventional MIMO communications.
• Distributed RIS sensing: Within the ISEA framework,
multiple RIS can be deployed cooperatively, each acting
as a local estimator. The distributed information among
these RIS units is then shared to enhance sensing accu-
racy. As a result, efficient and accurate low-complexity
distributed sensing paradigms and algorithms are essen-
tial.
• Energy efficiency and security: Employing RIS can
lower the overall energy consumption of wireless net-
works by minimizing high-power transmissions and op-
timizing signal paths for sensing. Nonetheless, effective
power control is necessary to mitigate the added costs
of operating RIS. Meanwhile, incorporating RIS into the
network also calls for enhanced security mechanisms,
leveraging intelligent signal manipulation to safeguard
against potential threats.
35
Remote Areas
Datacenters
Core Networks
Cellular Networks
Terrestrial Networks
Satellite Networks
Sensing data acquisition 
Control decision 
/task result feedback
Latency-tolerant task oﬄoading
Sensing data downloading
On-board AI computation
Oﬄoading 
decision
Fig. 10.
ISEA techniques can be enhanced by the space-ground integrated
network through the utilization of ubiquitous satellite sensing and communi-
cation coverage.
B. Space-Ground Empowered ISEA
ISEA can be implemented in space and ocean networks
to achieve uninterrupted global connectivity as envisioned
in 6G, which is shown in Fig. 10. These networks have
distinct characteristics compared with terrestrial networks in
aspects of sensing modalities, mobility, channel propagation,
computing architecture, topology, and QoS. The existence of
extra-terrestrial and maritime terminals leads to new sensing
modalities such as orbital images and under-water sonars,
while these non-terrestrial network nodes, e.g., low Earth orbit
(LEO) satellites, typically have scarce computing resources
compared with ground-based nodes such as BS. Also, the com-
munication links in non-terrestrial network nodes usually have
limited bandwidth, high latency, and short contact windows
due to mobility. Not only are these constraints challenging, but
tasks carried out in non-terrestrial networks, such as forest fire
alarming and rescuing, are usually mission-critical and demand
high reliability. It is thus motivated to design ISEA protocols
and algorithms dedicated to those networks to address the
aforementioned challenges.
In conventional bent-pipe architectures for satellite-centric
remote sensing, satellites simply relay commands from the
ground and transmit raw data via low-rate links, resulting in
communication bottlenecks. Similar to the ISEA paradigm, a
C2 framework integrated addresses this challenge by employ-
ing onboard computation for data filtering and semantic match-
ing, thereby enabling more efficient and scalable downlink
communications. A few representative works are introduced
as follows. A typical satellite-terrestrial collaborative object
detection scenario is considered in [96], where the satellite
captures remote sensing images to be processed and trans-
mitted to the ground station for AI-based object detection. A
task-oriented communication scheme is developed to combat
the low-rate issue of satellite-terrestrial links. The satellite
first identifies between the region of interest and background
with a lightweight on-board model, downsamples the latter,
and transmits each processed image block with priorities
determined by their contribution to the detection task. Driven
by a similar motivation of reducing downlink data volume, the
authors of [246] propose an orbital edge computing (OEC)
system that places energy-efficient GPUs on nanosatellites
to enable onboard computation. Then, the system employs
a technique called intelligent early discard, which filters the
captured image using the onboard model, transmitting only
useful images to the ground station and discarding obscured
ones. Further, to tackle the computation resource limits, an
image frame can be divided into multiple tiles processed in
parallel on multiple satellites. In [247], the satellites carry
out a hyperspectral imaging task, collecting electromagnetic
spectrum in hundreds of frequency bands to be transmitted and
processed at the ground station for pixel-level classification.
An onboard band-selection system is proposed to reduce the
downlink communication cost, which selects only a subset
of bands to transmit based on the image content, network
conditions, and power budgets. The adaptive band selection
problem, which aims to maximize the utility, is composed of
accuracy and costs and is solved via reinforcement learning
under energy and latency constraints.
Aligning with the ISEA framework, another line of research
focuses on harnessing ground-based devices for sensing, with
satellites serving as the overarching edge servers. Specifically,
[248] considers the virtual network function placement prob-
lem in a satellite edge computing system where multiple satel-
lites cooperate to endow devices collecting sensory data with
computational capabilities. The said problem is formulated
to maximize the sum payoffs of scheduled devices subject
to network resource constraints, for which a decentralized
algorithm is developed by a potential game approach. In
[249], multiple field robots are controlled by an integrated
satellite-UAV network with one UAV equipped with sensors,
computation resources, and communication modules and one
satellite connected to the UAV. The UAV senses the system
state and analyzes the sensing data jointly with the remote
center through a satellite connection to generate control com-
mands that are transmitted to the robots via orthogonal chan-
nels. Under latency constraints, the power allocation among
channels is optimized to maximize the control performance
measured in linear quadratic regulator cost and associated
with the downlink data rate. Moreover, a flexible space-
ground ISEA framework, termed fluid inference, is proposed
by [57]. It adaptively splits AI workloads across satellites,
edge servers, and end devices, leveraging real-time resource
constraints to slash data traffic and improve responsiveness.
By orchestrating partial or full inference traverse satellite
networks, the accuracy-latency tradeoff is optimized under
limited resources in computation and communication.
C. ISEA with Advanced Networking
Though most ISEA applications can be realized within an
edge network, certain ISEA operations still require edge-cloud
cooperation or collaboration between multiple edge networks,
such as hierarchical FL, model downloading, and offloading
of heavy computational loads. Traditional protocols under the
best-effort principle cannot guarantee low latency and high
reliability per request by ISEA applications. This requires
advanced techniques that involve task-oriented coordination
of the transportation and networking layers in transport and
36
ISEA Control
…
ISEA devices
Visual signal
Structured data
Speech
Com signal
Data
Sensory data capture
Input
Command
Sensor 
Adjustment
ISEA setups
Data modalities
Sensory environment
Downstream tasks
Hardware specifications
Wireless conditions
…
ISEA Services
Fig. 11.
The workflow of foundation model-assisted ISEA. Foundation
models can assist ISEA by undergoing pre-training and fine-tuning tailored
to ISEA-specific settings and sensory data.
core networks. To this end, ultra-low latency networks such
as time-sensitive networking (TSN) and deterministic network-
ing (DetNet) can be integrated into the ISEA architecture.
TSN employs time-division multiplexing, assigning dedicated
timeslots to prioritized time-sensitive flows such that they are
isolated from best-effort flows and achieve predictable queue-
ing delays through centralized management. Through these
mechanisms, time-sensitive traffic enjoys bounded maximum
latency and extremely low packet loss rates. With similar
designing objectives, DetNet focuses on the network and
higher layers, enabling deterministic latency through a set of
protocols, including flow synchronization, path setup, traffic
engineering, etc.
Some early attempts at integrating ISEA and networking
techniques are introduced as follows. In [250], an edge-
cloud collaboration platform called IndustEdge is proposed
to provide low-latency and reliable access to intelligence for
smart industry applications, e.g., fault detection. It adopts
the TSN protocol for the link layer and further provides an
extensible edge-cloud orchestration component for flexible
microservice deployments onto edge or cloud nodes. Also,
IndustEdge provides an algorithm library that includes various
tasks (e.g., classification and clustering) and supports different
collaboration modes, all with transparent life-cycle manage-
ment. Another work [251] considers a collaborative multi-
access edge computing system where systems in different
domains can be interconnected for computation offloading.
The proposed task deterministic networks (TDN) aims to
achieve E2E deterministic communication for multi-access
edge computing systems involving heterogeneous access and
interconnections between multiple edge computing systems
via transportation networks. To this end, TDN features cross-
domain collaboration mechanisms to integrate TSN and Det-
Net protocols in different layers and designs a seamless
multi-controller working scheme coordinating edge access and
global deterministic forwarding in aspects of traffic scheduling
and resource allocation.
X. RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES AND OPEN ISSUES
A. ISEA Meets Foundation Models
With the boom of large-scale foundation models, ISEA
is believed to be further accelerated and improved by the
generalized intelligence pre-trained models. As illustrated in
Fig. 11, foundation models can serve as an intelligent agent
that understands sensing data and network conditions to make
real-time configuration adaptations for accomplishing human
commands. We discuss the foundation model-assisted ISEA
from two perspectives: model adaptation and deployment,
respectively.
The adaptation of foundation models that are pretrained
for general purposes to ISEA can be roughly categorized
into two levels. The first level is the direct adaptation of a
large language model to sensing tasks, including instruction
reasoning, planning, and simulation, which is an efficient and
low-cost approach. To harness LLMs for sensing without fine-
tuning, detailed textual descriptions of the sensing environment
are required to prompt LLMs to make sensing decisions and
issue control commands. For example, a prompt can detail
vehicle states, including coordinates, speed, past trajectories,
current velocity, and acceleration in LLM-assisted autonomous
driving, accompanied by a chain of thoughts to help the
LLM decompose the procedure of understanding current states
and take action. This approach leverages LLMs’ ability to
understand complex and novel scenarios with zero-shot or few-
shots of training data.
Another level of adaptation is to fine-tune foundation mod-
els which, in addition to textual prompts, take the sensing
data directly as inputs. Take camera-based visual sensing as
an example. The architecture of vision foundation models
can be applied, which are typically built on a transformer
encoder architecture and pre-trained in image classification,
image-text pairing, or image captioning tasks. Its adaptation
to specific ISEA tasks can be achieved by downstream task-
aware fine-tuning. For instance, one popular vision model,
called SAM [252], has been employed in different perception
scenarios, e.g., 3D object detection by projecting LiDAR
point cloud to BEV images, generating prompts for each grid
in the images to detect masks for foreground objects. The
zero-shot transfer capability of SAM is leveraged to generate
segmentation masks and 2D boxes. However, the empirical
study shows that the vision foundation model is not capable
of handling the sparse and noisy points [253] in practical
ISEA scenarios. Moreover, current vision foundation models
still require handcraft adaptations and designs to accommodate
the properties of visual information, such as the sparsity and
temporality of the point cloud, for reliable and accurate edge
sensing. Facing the time-varying sensing environments, data
distribution and task requirements in ISEA, an important future
direction is to automate the process of real-world foundation
model adaptations. The ultimate goal of foundation model
adaptation is to incorporate different modalities, such as text,
audio, and images, for improved robustness and accuracy in
ISEA sensing tasks. Typically, the feature extractor for 2D
images and 3D point clouds varies significantly due to the
heterogeneity between sparse points and dense pixels. The
direct fusion of different types of data sources overlooks the
field of view outside the intersected area [254]. The crafted
design of a uniform multi-modal data extractor and fusion
module is a main challenge in the multi-modal foundation
model training for diverse ISEA tasks.
37
Considering the deployment of foundation models in the
wireless edge, a few precursor works have investigated the
placement of foundation models and the caching of the query
and response for low-latency accessing of AI-Generated Con-
tent (AIGC), which inspires the implementation of foundation
models for ISEA infrastructure. A hierarchical network archi-
tecture is designed in [255], [256] to utilize the computation
of devices, edge servers, and the central cloud to pass on the
on-device inference task. The inference relay is terminated
once it hits one cached response, hence reducing the execution
time of inference tasks. In the ISEA system, the multi-agent
cooperation of computing and communication can be orches-
trated to access the foundation model-empowered sensing with
low latency. The work in [256] considers the decomposition
of a user request for cooperative edge inference, where the
GPT on the cloud does the task planning and distributes the
subtasks to edge clusters to accomplish the different parts
of a user request. A collaborative distributed diffusion-based
AIGC framework is proposed in [257] to partition a diffusion
process for integrated central and edge inference to provide a
better personalized user experience. Specifically, the requests
from multiple devices can share a few denoising steps in
the diffusion inference stage to reduce the computational
overhead and improve resource utilization efficiency. The
considered task decomposition, planning, and distributed exe-
cution for ISEA is another interesting direction for foundation
model implementations in ISEA systems. Moreover, the edge
cooperative fine-tuning of pre-trained foundation models to
align the ISEA performance with task preference is another
interesting direction [218], which is closely related to MEC
and distributed learning systems. Despite these pioneer works,
timely and resource-efficient access to the foundation model
service in the ISEA system still requires a further systematic
framework and refinements to enhance the user experience
under limited communication and computation capabilities,
especially in view of the network congestion caused by
massive requests to the central cloud. Special characteristics
and novel acceleration techniques of foundation model com-
putation shall be considered and integrated natively into ISEA
design, such as key-value (KV) cache, speculative decoding,
sparse attention, etc.
B. Convergence of ISEA and ISAC
ISEA and ISAC have largely been two independent lines
of research due to their different technical motivations. While
ISEA mainly focuses on optimized communication and com-
putation for AI-empowered sensing, ISAC aims at coexistence
and joint design of RF sensing and communication within
shared hardware and spectrum, particularly focusing on multi-
functional waveforms. However, as two key functions coexist-
ing in 6G, ISEA and ISAC are mutually complementary in
multiple aspects, e.g., sensing modalities and AI backbones,
while also potentially contending for spectrum and commu-
nication resources. Therefore, the convergence of ISEA and
ISAC is a promising future direction, aimed at deep integration
and cooperation of both for improved task performance. In
what follows, we will first discuss how ISEA and ISAC
interact with and assist each other, and then list several
research challenges within a converged framework of ISEA
and ISAC.
First, consider assisting ISAC with ISEA. The first aspect
is the use of ISEA sensory information for optimized ISAC
operations. Sensing modalities in ISEA, usually with high
resolution and rich semantic information, can enable situa-
tional awareness for ISAC by, e.g., scene identification, link
blockage prediction, and user localization [39], [258]. This
improves the performance of several critical ISAC techniques,
such as beamforming and power allocation, while reducing the
pilot overhead [259]. The gain will be particularly significant
for high-mobility scenarios where ISEA-assisted predictive
control reduces the negative effects of constant environmental
changes. The second aspect is direct augmentation of ISAC
sensing data with the ISEA counterpart. With properly de-
signed AI models that translate information between domains,
the high-resolution ISEA sensing data can enhance the qual-
ity of ISAC sensing data by localization refinement, time-
domain interpolation, vision-aided generative reconstruction,
etc. Then, spectrum resources for sensing can be saved to
improve the communication performance without sacrificing
sensing performance. Further, ISEA can provide AI inference
for ISAC signal processing [260] and efficient communication
of ISAC sensing data between network nodes to realize
efficient and intelligent network-as-a-sensor. Conversely, ISAC
can assist ISEA in several aspects. The sensing modalities of
ISAC, i.e., RF sensing, can complement typical ISEA sensing,
as it generally has a larger sensing range and higher robustness
to ambient lighting conditions. While light-based sensing can
suffer from occlusion, ISAC can realize non-LoS localization
[42]. Compared to LiDARs, ISAC is a more power-efficient
method to obtain depth information which is critical for
environment perception with visual features. In addition, ISAC
sensing data can be used for ISEA model training [261] and
estimation of several ISEA sensing parameters such as camera
pose, relative speed, etc [262].
Several research directions are warranted by the conver-
gence of ISEA and ISAC. First, the scheme for integrating
sensing data from different sources with different modalities
shall be developed, which combats several practical issues
such as time synchronization, different coverage, relative lo-
cation measure error, etc. Second, despite mutual assistance,
ISEA and ISAC operations inevitably use the same spectrum
and hardware, leading to resource allocation problems. Specifi-
cally, the radio resources shall be optimally allocated for ISAC
sensing waveforms, user traffic and ISEA traffic for sensing
feature transmission, and the computing resources allocated
for processing of different sensing modalities. Some funda-
mental tradeoffs remain to be analyzed and optimized. For
example, in the sensing-communication tradeoff, the allocation
of more resources for sensing improves sensing resolution
but requires a higher sensory feature compression ratio that
degrades transmission reliability, necessitating optimal control
for maximizing the sensing performance.
38
Ultra-low
Low
Moderate
 ms
≤10
 ms
≤100
 s
≤1
Remote 
Surgeries 
Vehicle2 
Everything
Industrial 
Automation
Augmented 
Reality
Human 
Tracking
Robotic 
Control
Facial 
Recognition
Smart 
Home
Healthcare 
Monitoring
Latency Requirements
Fig. 12. The latency requirements of ISEA tasks can generally be categorized
into three levels: ultra-low-latency, low-latency, and moderate latency.
C. Ultra-Low-Latency ISEA
The growing demand for real-time intelligent decision-
making has been seen in mission-critical applications such as
autonomous driving, remote surgeries, and industrial automa-
tion, as shown in Fig. 12. This necessitates ultra-low-latency
(ultra-LoLa) ISEA where the sensing task must be com-
pleted within strict latency constraints while simultaneously
guaranteeing sensing performance. The E2E latency of ISEA
typically consists of sequential processes, including data sens-
ing, on-sensor computation, and feature transmission, where
communication latency must be under several milliseconds to
meet the requirements of ultra-LoLa tasks. Prevalent digital
systems, e.g., LTE, aim at building errorless bit pipes that
are agnostic of the task characteristics and latency deadlines.
In view of their insufficiency in achieving ultra-low latency,
we explore research opportunities to achieve ultra-LoLa ISEA
with two suitable digital transmission schemes: short packet
transmission (SPT) and uncoded transmission.
URLLC has been defined as one of the primary 5G mis-
sions, aiming to achieve latencies below one millisecond
and packet-error rates of 10−5 or lower, thereby enabling
mission-critical applications in 5G networks [263]. A cen-
tral challenge for URLLC lies in balancing tradeoffs among
data rate, latency, and reliability—an issue long investigated
by information theorists [264]. Guided by these theoretical
insights, one practical approach adopted in 5G engineering
for implementing URLLC is SPT [265]. The strict deadlines
imposed by short packets (or blocklengths) lead to a non-
negligible transmission error probability, which depends on
the specific operating regime [263]. At the cost of lower
data rates, SPT restricts URLLC deployments to relatively
low-rate transmissions (e.g., sending commands to remote
robots or uploading sensing data such as humidity, temper-
ature, or pollution) [266], [267]. Nevertheless, researchers
have explored diverse methods to mitigate these limitations
by designing customized SPT techniques. These include non-
coherent transmission [268], optimal frame structures [269],
power control [270], wireless power transfer [271], and multi-
access schemes [266].
However, existing SPT approaches targeting URLLC fall
short of meeting the ultra-LoLa ISEA requirements. This
shortcoming arises because ISEA applications are typically
data-intensive and often require the transmission of high-
dimensional features, which conflicts with SPT’s limited pay-
load sizes and leads to communication bottlenecks. The prob-
lem is further exacerbated for tasks subject to strict latency
requirements. Moreover, the E2E performance of sensing
tasks cannot be accurately measured through decoding error
probability alone, as that metric is more suited to assessing
communication reliability. To address these challenges, the
first framework that enables ultra-LoLa ISEA leverages the
interplay between SPT and multi-view sensing—improving
accuracy while adhering to stringent latency constraints [272].
Within such a framework, a fundamental tradeoff is identified
and optimized between communication reliability and the
number of sensing views, both of which are governed by
the packet length. This integration of SPT and ISEA opens
numerous opportunities for future work. One key direction
is the simultaneous improvement of accuracy and reduction
of latency through a joint optimization of packet length
and coding rate, which requires further exploration into the
effects of feature dimensionality and quantization on packet
selection [273]. From an energy-efficiency standpoint, design-
ing power control techniques that accommodate both fading
channels and feature importance is also a promising avenue.
Additionally, extending the ultra-LoLa inference paradigm to
incorporate AirComp constitutes another compelling research
direction.
The aforementioned SPT is task-agnostic and prioritizes link
reliability at the expense of data rate. Unlike SPT, another
technique for achieving ultra-LoLa ISEA is to enable uncoded
feature transmission, thereby avoiding the need for channel
code transmission [274]. This method leverages the inherent
robustness of classifiers to absorb bit errors caused by chan-
nel perturbations, maintaining the desired sensing accuracy
under latency constraints. Retransmission and multiview are
investigated to enhance classification robustness, with their
benefits validated in scenarios where the classification margin
is insufficient to counteract channel distortions. Uncoded fea-
ture transmission opens up numbers of directions for realizing
ultra-LoLa ISEA: 1) adaptive modulation schemes for ISEA
systems by considering channel conditions and classification
margins; 2) importance-aware power control over quantized
bits for enhancing the sensing performance.
D. Practical Challenges in ISEA
This subsection discusses challenges in practical implemen-
tation of ISEA from the perspectives of scalability, energy
resource constraints, heterogeneous and dynamic networks and
controlling overhead, highlighting key issues and potential
research directions.
1) Scalability: The scalability of ISEA systems is a critical
challenge due to the massive number of sensors, edge devices,
and AI models that must operate cohesively in 6G networks.
As envisioned, 6G will support billions of interconnected
devices, generating vast amounts of multi-modal sensory data
(e.g., from RGB cameras, LiDARs, and RF sensors) that
require real-time processing and transmission. This scale in-
troduces several issues:
• Cooperation of numerous devices: As more nodes in
edge networks are equipped with AI and sensing capa-
bilities, the number of sensors participating in cooperative
ISEA is envisioned to continuously grow. For example,
39
in cooperative autonomous driving scenarios, the number
of agents in popular datasets have increased from 2 in
F-Cooper [275] to 6 in OPV2V [276] to 12 in V2X-
Sim [277]. While such a trend enables more holistic
sensing, it also increases communication overhead for
multiple access and complicates scheduling and resource
management. Moreover, coordinating distributed learning
(e.g., federated learning) across thousands of devices
introduces synchronization and convergence issues.
• Data volume and processing overload: Developments
in resolutions and ranges of sensing technologies leads
to higher dimensionality of sensory data. For example,
point clouds from LiDARs now have data rates up to
several Gbps [35]. Sensors and edge brain with limited
computational capabilities may struggle to process these
data streams in real time. Also, the communication rate
of data exchange grows proportionally, leading to a
communication bottleneck.
• Model scalability: State-of-the-art multi-modal founda-
tion models consistently grows in the numbers of param-
eters and required computation operations, known as the
scaling law. Deploying such models requires significant
memory and computational resources, which may exceed
the capabilities of resource-constrained edge devices and
edge servers.
Research directions: AirComp can be leveraged to ag-
gregate sensory data efficiently [150], as its latency does
not grow with the number of devices. However, with
numerous devices, several challenges requires research
efforts, such as device scheduling and synchronization.
Neural network-based data down-sampling can be lever-
age to cope with the high data rate, and its interplay
with wireless communication warrants future research.
Model compression techniques, including quantization
and pruning, can reduce the footprint of AI models,
enabling their deployment on resource-limited devices
[278]. Efficient inference techniques, such as speculative
decoding and expert parallelism, can accelerate inference
on large-scale models. Finally, hierarchical edge-cloud ar-
chitectures can offload computationally intensive tasks to
higher-tier nodes, balancing scalability and performance.
2) Energy Constraints: Energy efficiency is an important
concern for ISEA, given the resource-constrained nature of
edge devices and sensors. The integration of sensing, AI infer-
ence, and communication in 6G networks demands significant
energy, particularly for real-time, mission-critical applications.
• Sensing energy costs: High-resolution sensors like Li-
DARs and cameras consume substantial power for data
acquisition. For example, a typical LiDAR module can
consume from 10 to 30 watts [279], posing challenges
for battery-powered devices like drones or IoT sensors.
• AI inference and training: Edge AI operations, in-
cluding inference and distributed learning, are energy-
intensive. Deep learning models, even when optimized,
require significant computational resources for forward
and backward passes, especially for real-time tasks
like robotic control or semantic segmentation. Federated
learning, while reducing data transmission, still incurs
high energy costs for local model updates.
• Communication
energy
costs:
Transmitting
high-
dimensional sensory data or model updates over wireless
channels consumes considerable energy, particularly in
mmWave or THz bands, which require high transmit
power to overcome path loss. The frequent data ex-
changes in ISEA for cooperative sensing or computation
offloading further exacerbate energy demands.
Research directions: Energy-efficient designs are critical
for ISEA. Selective sensor wake-up based on query
or environmental information can reduce the long-term
average sensing power consumption, thereby extending
the network lifetime. Energy-efficient JSCC can minimize
transmission energy by allocating power across different
messages [280] or adopt lightweight models to reduce
the computation energy [281]. Dynamic power control for
AirComp can optimize energy use during data aggrega-
tion [153]. Additionally, energy harvesting technologies,
such as RF energy harvesting or solar-powered sensors,
can extend the operational lifetime of devices. Finally,
task offloading frameworks that balance local and edge
computation based on energy availability can enhance
overall efficiency.
3) Heterogeneous and Dynamic Networks: The heterogene-
ity of 6G networks, encompassing diverse devices, sensing
modalities, and communication protocols, poses significant
interoperability challenges for ISEA. Seamless integration
and cooperation among these components are essential for
achieving optimal E2E task performance.
• Diverse sensing modalities: ISEA integrates multiple
sensing modalities (e.g., RF, LiDAR, and RGB-D cam-
eras), each with distinct data formats, sampling rates, and
processing requirements. Harmonizing these modalities
for joint processing or fusion is challenging, especially
when devices operate on different temporal and spatial
scales. For instance, aligning RF sensing data and video
streams with different streaming rates and updating fre-
quencies requires synchronization mechanisms.
• Heterogeneous devices and protocols: 6G networks
will include a mix of legacy and next-generation de-
vices, ranging from low-power IoT sensors to high-end
autonomous vehicles. These devices may use different
communication protocols (e.g., NB-IoT, LTE-M, 5G NR)
and AI model formats, complicating cooperative tasks
such as distributed inference or sensor data sharing.
Moreover, hierarchical ISEA requires joint control and
optimization across edge, transport and core networks.
• Network dynamics: The dynamic nature of 6G networks,
with high device mobility and varying channel conditions,
affects sensing performance. For example, in vehicular
networks, rapidly changing topologies due to high-speed
vehicle movement can disrupt cooperative sensing or
model synchronization, leading to degraded task perfor-
mance.
Research directions: To enhance interoperability, stan-
dardized data formats and protocols for multi-modal sen-
40
sory data exchange are needed. Semantic communication
can be used to reconcile different sensing modalities un-
der a unified framework. Adaptive modulation and coding
schemes tailored to sensing tasks can accommodate di-
verse device capabilities. Additionally, LLM-empowered
network agents can dynamically manage resources and
protocols to maintain seamless cooperation under differ-
ent task requirements and network status [282].
4) Controlling Overhead: Although the joint ISEA de-
sign enhances task performance, it also introduces additional
overhead for signaling and computation operations in control
algorithms. These overhead becomes particularly significant in
ultra-low-latency or massive access applications.
• Signaling overhead: The time-varying nature of sensing
context requires frequent transmission of control deci-
sions and feedback information between sensors and edge
nodes. Meanwhile, the raised dynamic resource map-
ping between communication, AI and sensing introduces
higher multiple access control overhead compared to 5G’s
static scheduling [283]. In addition, while the unified
waveform design in ISAC reduces redundant signal pro-
cessing delays, it requires additional reference signals for
cross-functional channel estimation (e.g., simultaneous
CSI and radar sensing parameter extraction).
• Computation overhead: Real-time cross-domain opti-
mization demands more baseband processing due to 1)
the coupled sensing-communication beamforming (e.g.,
solving high-dimensional Pareto fronts); 2) AI task QoS
monitoring (e.g., perceptual quality metrics for generative
AI). This places heavy computing burden on 6G network
controllers.
Research directions: Digital twins of the environment
can reduce the information feedback to the minimum
amount by incrementally updating the digital twin at the
server. For example, the server can estimate the wire-
less channel using ray-tracing in the digital twin, which
only requires low-dimensional object position feedback
but not CSI feedback. The computation overhead of
control algorithms can be simplified by approximated
optimizations and decentralized computation. Moreover,
advanced baseband hardware, e.g., in-memory computing
[284], can increase processing speed by up to 1000×
compared with existing semiconductor devices, making
it a promising solution for ultra-low-latency applications.
XI. CONCLUDING REMARKS
Driven by the rapid evolvement of AI and sensing technolo-
gies, a future digital era is emerging with ubiquitous perception
sensing on 6G infrastructure. A key to realizing this vision
is the integrated design of communication, computing, and
sensing to support sensing data analytics at the wireless edge,
raising a task-oriented paradigm, ISEA. In this paper, we have
presented a comprehensive overview of ISEA and a detailed
survey of relevant techniques. In particular, we establish the
ISEA framework by providing concrete definitions of its
key design principles and architectures. Under the unified
principle of processing and transmitting sensory information
for E2E metrics, we review enabling techniques for ISEA from
various aspects and discuss several promising future research
directions. We hope that this survey can be a useful reference
for researchers entering this emerging field.
REFERENCES
[1] ITU-R, “Framework and overall objectives of the future development
of IMT for 2030 and beyond,” [Online] https://www.itu.int/rec/R-REC-
M.2160-0-202311-I/en, 2023.
[2] W. Saad, M. Bennis, and M. Chen, “A vision of 6G wireless systems:
Applications, trends, technologies, and open research problems,” IEEE
Netw., vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 134–142, 2020.
[3] HUAWEI, “6G: The next horizon from connected people and things
to connected intelligence,” [Online] https://www-file.huawei.com/-/
media/corp2020/pdf/tech-insights/1/6g-white-paper-en.pdf, 2022 (ac-
cessed Dec. 1, 2022).
[4] K. B. Letaief, Y. Shi, J. Lu, and J. Lu, “Edge artificial intelligence
for 6G: Vision, enabling technologies, and applications,” IEEE J. Sel.
Areas Commun., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 5–36, 2022.
[5] Y. Mao, X. Yu, K. Huang, Y.-J. Angela Zhang, and J. Zhang, “Green
edge AI: A contemporary survey,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 112, no. 7, pp.
880–911, 2024.
[6] G. Zhu, D. Liu, Y. Du, C. You, J. Zhang, and K. Huang, “Toward
an intelligent edge: Wireless communication meets machine learning,”
IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 19–25, 2020.
[7] Z. Feng, Z. Wei, X. Chen, H. Yang, Q. Zhang, and P. Zhang,
“Joint communication, sensing, and computation enabled 6G intelligent
machine system,” IEEE Netw., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 34–42, 2021.
[8] L. Xie, S. H. Song, Y. C. Eldar, and K. B. Letaief, “Collaborative
sensing in perceptive mobile networks: Opportunities and challenges,”
IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 16–23, 2023.
[9] D. Wen, Y. Zhou, X. Li, Y. Shi, K. Huang, and K. B. Letaief, “A survey
on integrated sensing, communication, and computation,” to appear in
IEEE Comm. Surv. Tutor., 2024.
[10] Global
Semiconductor
Alliance,
“The
challenges
to
achieve
level
4/level
5
autonomous
driv-
ing.”
[Online].
Available:
https://www.gsaglobal.org/forums/
the-challenges-to-achieve-level-4-level-5-autonomous-driving/
[11] Z.
Wang,
Q.
Zeng,
H.
Zheng,
and
K.
Huang,
“Revisiting
outage for edge inference systems,” 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03686
[12] C. E. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication,” Bell Syst.
Tech. J., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 379–423, 1948.
[13] H. Bagheri, M. Noor-A-Rahim, Z. Liu, H. Lee, D. Pesch, K. Moess-
ner, and P. Xiao, “5G NR-V2X: Toward connected and cooperative
autonomous driving,” IEEE Commun. Std. Mag., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 48–
54, 2021.
[14] S. Dang, O. Amin, B. Shihada, and M.-S. Alouini, “What should 6G
be?” Nat. Electron., vol. 3, pp. 20–29, 2020.
[15] Z. Zhang, Y. Xiao, Z. Ma, M. Xiao, Z. Ding, X. Lei, G. K. Kara-
giannidis, and P. Fan, “6G wireless networks: Vision, requirements,
architecture, and key technologies,” IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag., vol. 14,
no. 3, pp. 28–41, 2019.
[16] F. Liu, L. Zhou, C. Masouros, A. Li, W. Luo, and A. Petropulu, “To-
ward dual-functional radar-communication systems: Optimal waveform
design,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 66, no. 16, pp. 4264–4279,
2018.
[17] S. C. Mukhopadhyay, S. K. S. Tyagi, N. K. Suryadevara, V. Piuri,
F. Scotti, and S. Zeadally, “Artificial intelligence-based sensors for next
generation IoT applications: A review,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 21, no. 22,
pp. 24 920–24 932, 2021.
[18] T. W. Mao, Q. Liu, X. W. Li, J. H. Cao, F. Chen, W. X. Xu, M. K. Tey,
Y. X. Huang, and L. You, “Quantum-enhanced sensing by echoing spin-
nematic squeezing in atomic Bose–Einstein condensate,” Nat. Phys.,
vol. 19, p. 1585–1590, 2023.
[19] F. Liu, Y. Cui, C. Masouros, J. Xu, T. X. Han, Y. C. Eldar, and
S. Buzzi, “Integrated sensing and communications: Toward dual-
functional wireless networks for 6G and beyond,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun., vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 1728–1767, 2022.
[20] M. Nemati, Y. H. Kim, and J. Choi, “Toward joint radar, communi-
cation, computation, localization, and sensing in IoT,” IEEE Access,
vol. 10, pp. 11 772–11 788, 2022.
[21] X. Luo, Q. Lin, R. Zhang, H.-H. Chen, X. Wang, and M. Huang, “ISAC
– a survey on its layered architecture, technologies, standardizations,
prototypes and testbeds,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., pp. 1–1, 2025.
41
[22] X. Luo, H.-H. Chen, and Q. Guo, “Semantic communications:
Overview, open issues, and future research directions,” IEEE Wireless
Commun., vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 210–219, 2022.
[23] Q. Lan, D. Wen, Z. Zhang, Q. Zeng, X. Chen, P. Popovski, and
K. Huang, “What is semantic communication? a view on conveying
meaning in the era of machine intelligence,” J. Commun. Inf. Netw.,
vol. 6, no. 4, p. 36, 2021.
[24] H. Xie, Z. Qin, G. Y. Li, and B.-H. Juang, “Deep learning enabled se-
mantic communication systems,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 69,
pp. 2663–2675, 2021.
[25] X. Li and S. Bi, “Optimal AI model splitting and resource allocation for
device-edge co-inference in multi-user wireless sensing systems,” IEEE
Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 11 094–11 108, 2024.
[26] G. Zhu, Z. Lyu, X. Jiao, P. Liu, M. Chen, J. Xu, S. Cui, and P. Zhang,
“Pushing AI to wireless network edge: an overview on integrated
sensing, communication, and computation towards 6G,” Sci. China Inf.
Sci., vol. 66, no. 3, 2023.
[27] X. Cheng, H. Zhang, J. Zhang, S. Gao, S. Li, Z. Huang, L. Bai,
Z. Yang, X. Zheng, and L. Yang, “Intelligent multi-modal sensing-
communication integration: Synesthesia of machines,” IEEE Comm.
Surv. Tutor., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 258–301, 2024.
[28] Z. Chang, S. Liu, X. Xiong, Z. Cai, and G. Tu, “A survey of recent
advances in edge-computing-powered artificial intelligence of things,”
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 18, pp. 13 849–13 875, 2021.
[29] S. He, K. Shi, C. Liu, B. Guo, J. Chen, and Z. Shi, “Collaborative
sensing in internet of things: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Comm.
Surv. Tutor., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1435–1474, 2022.
[30] H. N. Hu, Q. Z. Cai, D. Q. Wang, J. Lin, M. Sun, P. Krahenbuhl,
T. Darrell, and F. Yu, “Joint monocular 3D vehicle detection and
tracking,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Seoul,
Korea (South), Oct. 27-Nov. 2, 2019, pp. 5389–5398.
[31] F. Endres, J. Hess, J. Sturm, D. Cremers, and W. Burgard, “3-D
mapping with an RGB-D camera,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 30, no. 1,
pp. 177–187, 2014.
[32] M. O. Aqel, M. H. Marhaban, M. I. Saripan, and N. B. Ismail, “Review
of visual odometry: types, approaches, challenges, and applications,”
SpringerPlus, vol. 5, pp. 1–26, 2016.
[33] J. Geng, “Structured-light 3D surface imaging: a tutorial,” Adv. Opt.
Photonics, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 128–160, 2011.
[34] B. Behroozpour, P. A. Sandborn, M. C. Wu, and B. E. Boser, “LiDAR
system architectures and circuits,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 55,
no. 10, pp. 135–142, 2017.
[35] R. Roriz, J. Cabral, and T. Gomes, “Automotive LiDAR technology:
A survey,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 6282–
6297, 2022.
[36] Y. Li and J. Ibanez-Guzman, “LiDAR for autonomous driving: The
principles, challenges, and trends for automotive LiDAR and perception
systems,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 50–61, 2020.
[37] Y. Zhou and O. Tuzel, “Voxelnet: End-to-end learning for point cloud
based 3D object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Salt Lake City, UT, USA, Jun. 18-22
2018, pp. 4490–4499.
[38] A. H. Lang, S. Vora, H. Caesar, L. Zhou, J. Yang, and O. Beijbom,
“Pointpillars: Fast encoders for object detection from point clouds,” in
Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Long Beach, CA, USA., Jun. 16-19, 2019, pp. 12 697–12 705.
[39] B. Lin, C. Zhao, F. Gao, G. Ye Li, J. Qian, and H. Wang, “Environment
reconstruction based on multi-user selection and multi-modal fusion in
ISAC,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 15 083–
15 095, 2024.
[40] H. Abedi, A. Ansariyan, P. P. Morita, A. Wong, J. Boger, and G. Shaker,
“AI-powered noncontact in-home gait monitoring and activity recogni-
tion system based on mm-wave FMCW Radar and cloud computing,”
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 11, pp. 9465–9481, 2023.
[41] M. Kok, J. D. Hol, and T. B. Sch¨on, “Indoor positioning using
ultrawideband and inertial measurements,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
vol. 64, no. 4, pp. 1293–1303, 2015.
[42] Z. Ye, C. Yu, H. Zhu, Y. He, M. Gao, and G. Yu, “ISAC-assisted
collision avoidance mechanism for vehicle-to-infrastructure systems,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh., pp. 1–15, 2024.
[43] I. Bekkerman and J. Tabrikian, “Target detection and localization using
MIMO radars and sonars,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 54, no. 10,
pp. 3873–3883, 2006.
[44] M. S. Seyfioglu, B. Erol, S. Z. Gurbuz, and M. G. Amin, “DNN transfer
learning from diversified micro-Doppler for motion classification,”
IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst., vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 2164–2180,
2019.
[45] X. Xiong, A. Ren, T. Yuan, A. Zahid, Q. H. Abbasi, and M. A.
Imran, “Human motion recognition by micro-Doppler features and
concatenated CNN-LSTM network,” IEEE Sensors J., pp. 1–1, 2024.
[46] F. Liu, Y. Cui, C. Masouros, J. Xu, T. X. Han, Y. C. Eldar, and
S. Buzzi, “Integrated sensing and communications: Toward dual-
functional wireless networks for 6G and beyond,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun., vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 1728–1767, 2022.
[47] H. Rebecq, R. Ranftl, V. Koltun, and D. Scaramuzza, “High speed and
high dynamic range video with an event camera,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 1964–1980, 2021.
[48] D. Frossard and R. Urtasun, “End-to-end learning of multi-sensor 3D
tracking by detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA),
Brisbane, Australia, May 21-25, 2018, pp. 635–642.
[49] M. Liang, B. Yang, Y. Chen, R. Hu, and R. Urtasun, “Multi-task
multi-sensor fusion for 3D object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vision Pattern Recogn. (CVPR), Long Beach, CA, USA, Jun.
16-20, 2019, pp. 7337–7345.
[50] M. Liang, B. Yang, S. L. Wang, and R. Urtasun, “Deep continuous
fusion for multi-sensor 3D object detection,” in Proc. European Conf.
Comput. Vis. (ECCV), Munich, Germany, Sep. 8-14, 2018, pp. 663–
678.
[51] M. Sualeh and G.-W. Kim, “Visual-LiDAR based 3D object detection
and tracking for embedded systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 156 285–
156 298, 2020.
[52] L. Wang, X. Zhang, J. Li, B. Xv, R. Fu, H. Chen, L. Yang, D. Jin,
and L. Zhao, “Multi-modal and multi-scale fusion 3D object detection
of 4D radar and LiDAR for autonomous driving,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., 2022.
[53] J. Gao, P. Li, Z. Chen, and J. Zhang, “A survey on deep learning
for multimodal data fusion,” Neural Computation, vol. 32, no. 5, pp.
829–864, 2020.
[54] F. Zhao, C. Zhang, and B. Geng, “Deep multimodal data fusion,” ACM
Comput. Surv., vol. 56, no. 9, Apr. 2024.
[55] K. Huang, B. Shi, X. Li, X. Li, S. Huang, and Y. Li, “Multi-modal
sensor fusion for auto driving perception: A survey,” 2024. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.02703
[56] B. Yang, X. Cao, K. Xiong, C. Yuen, Y. L. Guan, S. Leng, L. Qian,
and Z. Han, “Edge intelligence for autonomous driving in 6G wireless
system: Design challenges and solutions,” IEEE Wireless Commun.,
vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 40–47, 2021.
[57] Q. Chen, Z. Wang, X. Chen, J. Wen, D. Zhou, S. Ji, M. Sheng, and
K. Huang, “Space-ground fluid AI for 6G edge intelligence,” 2024.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.15845
[58] M. Chen, D. G¨und¨uz, K. Huang, W. Saad, M. Bennis, A. V. Feljan, and
H. V. Poor, “Distributed learning in wireless networks: Recent progress
and future challenges,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 12,
pp. 3579–3605, 2021.
[59] Z. Yang, M. Chen, W. Saad, C. S. Hong, and M. Shikh-Bahaei, “Energy
efficient federated learning over wireless communication networks,”
IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 1935–1949, 2021.
[60] T. Sery, N. Shlezinger, K. Cohen, and Y. C. Eldar, “Over-the-air feder-
ated learning from heterogeneous data,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process.,
vol. 69, pp. 3796–3811, 2021.
[61] Z. Liu, Q. Lan, and K. Huang, “Over-the-air fusion of sparse spatial
features for integrated sensing and edge AI over broadband channels,”
[Online] https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.17973, 2024.
[62] ——, “Resource allocation for multiuser edge inference with batching
and early exiting,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 41, no. 4, pp.
1186–1200, 2023.
[63] X. Huang and S. Zhou, “Dynamic compression ratio selection for edge
inference systems with hard deadlines,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7,
no. 9, pp. 8800–8810, 2020.
[64] W. Shi, Y. Hou, S. Zhou, Z. Niu, Y. Zhang, and L. Geng, “Improving
device-edge cooperative inference of deep learning via 2-step prun-
ing,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM
WKSHPS), Paris, France, Apr 29–May 2, 2019.
[65] M. Jankowski, D. G¨und¨uz, and K. Mikolajczyk, “Joint device-edge in-
ference over wireless links with pruning,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop
Signal Process. Adv. Wireless Commun. (SPAWC), Atlanta, GA, USA,
May 26–29, 2020.
[66] J. Shao and J. Zhang, “Communication-computation trade-off in
resource-constrained edge inference,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 58,
no. 12, pp. 20–26, 2020.
[67] Q. Lan, Q. Zeng, P. Popovski, D. G¨und¨uz, and K. Huang, “Progressive
feature transmission for split classification at the wireless edge,” IEEE
Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 3837–3852, 2023.
42
[68] Y. Wang, J. Shen, T.-K. Hu, P. Xu, T. Nguyen, R. Baraniuk, Z. Wang,
and Y. Lin, “Dual dynamic inference: Enabling more efficient, adaptive,
and controllable deep inference,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. Signal Process.,
vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 623–633, 2020.
[69] E. Li, L. Zeng, Z. Zhou, and X. Chen, “Edge AI: On-demand
accelerating deep neural network inference via edge computing,” IEEE
Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 447–457, 2020.
[70] W. Shi, S. Zhou, Z. Niu, M. Jiang, and L. Geng, “Multiuser co-
inference with batch processing capable edge server,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 286–300, 2023.
[71] Y. Xu, S. Zhou, and Z. Niu, “Joint optimization of offloading,
batching
and
dvfs
for
multiuser
co-inference,”
2025.
[Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.14611
[72] X. Tang, X. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Yu, and L. Chen, “Joint multiuser DNN
partitioning and computational resource allocation for collaborative
edge intelligence,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 9511–
9522, 2021.
[73] J. Shao, Y. Mao, and J. Zhang, “Task-oriented communication for mul-
tidevice cooperative edge inference,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 73–87, 2023.
[74] C. Hu and B. Li, “Distributed inference with deep learning models
across heterogeneous edge devices,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Commun. (INFOCOM), Virtual, May, 2-5, 2022, pp. 330–339.
[75] D. G¨und¨uz, M. A. Wigger, T.-Y. Tung, P. Zhang, and Y. Xiao, “Joint
source–channel coding: Fundamentals and recent progress in practical
designs,” Proc. IEEE, pp. 1–32, 2024.
[76] E. Bourtsoulatze, D. Burth Kurka, and D. G¨und¨uz, “Deep joint source-
channel coding for wireless image transmission,” IEEE Trans. Cogn.
Commun. Netw., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 567–579, 2019.
[77] G. Zhu, J. Xu, K. Huang, and S. Cui, “Over-the-air computing for
wireless data aggregation in massive IoT,” IEEE Wireless Commun.,
vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 57–65, 2021.
[78] G. Zhu and K. Huang, “MIMO over-the-air computation for high-
mobility multimodal sensing,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 4,
pp. 6089–6103, 2019.
[79] X. Chen, K. B. Letaief, and K. Huang, “On the view-and-channel
aggregation gain in integrated sensing and edge AI,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun., vol. 42, no. 9, pp. 2292–2305, 2024.
[80] S. Tellex, N. Gopalan, H. Kress-Gazit, and C. Matuszek, “Robots
that use language,” Annu. Rev. Control Robot. Auton. Syst. (ARCRAS),
vol. 3, pp. 25–55, 2020.
[81] R. Minerva, G. M. Lee, and N. Crespi, “Digital twin in the IoT context:
A survey on technical features, scenarios, and architectural models,”
Proc. IEEE, vol. 108, no. 10, pp. 1785–1824, 2020.
[82] S. Pandit, “Qualcomm smart cities and IoT-as-a-service,” [Online]
https://www.qualcomm.com/content/dam/qcomm-martech/dm-assets/
documents/sanjeet pandit smart cities briefings. final 1.pdf, 2020.
[83] Alibaba, “How ET city brain is transforming the way we live
– one city at a time,” [Online] https://www.alibabacloud.com/blog/
how-et-city-brain-is-transforming-the-way-we-live-one-city-at-a-time
593745, 2018.
[84] S. Javaid, S. Zeadally, H. Fahim, and B. He, “Medical sensors and
their integration in wireless body area networks for pervasive healthcare
delivery: A review,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 3860–3877,
2022.
[85] V. Hayyolalam, M. Aloqaily, O. Ozkasap, and M. Guizani, “Edge
intelligence for empowering IoT-based healthcare systems,” IEEE
Wireless Commun., vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 6–14, 2021.
[86] J. A. del Peral-Rosado, R. Raulefs, J. A. Lopez-Salcedo, and G. Seco-
Granados, “Survey of cellular mobile radio localization methods: From
1G to 5G,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tuts., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1124–1148,
2018.
[87] G. Hancke and M. Kuhn, “An RFID distance bounding protocol,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Security Privacy Emerg. Areas Commun. Netw.
(SECURECOMM), Athens, Greece, Sep. 5-9, 2005, pp. 67–73.
[88] B. Huang, J. Zhao, and J. Liu, “A survey of simultaneous localization
and mapping with an envision in 6G wireless networks,” J. Global Pos.
Syst. (JoGPS), vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 206–236, 2021.
[89] N. Radwan, A. Valada, and W. Burgard, “VLocNet++: Deep multitask
learning for semantic visual localization and odometry,” IEEE Robot.
Autom. Lett., vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 4407–4414, 2018.
[90] D. Cattaneo, D. G. Sorrenti, and A. Valada, “CMRNet++: Map and
camera agnostic monocular visual localization in LiDAR maps,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA), Virtual, May 31 - Aug.
31, 2020.
[91] M. Gridseth and T. D. Barfoot, “Keeping an eye on things: Deep
learned features for long-term visual localization,” IEEE Robot. Autom.
Lett., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 1016–1023, 2022.
[92] A. Couturier and M. A. Akhloufi, “A review on absolute visual
localization for UAV,” Robot. Auton. Syst., vol. 135, 2021.
[93] S.-W. Ko, H. Chae, K. Han, S. Lee, D.-W. Seo, and K. Huang, “V2X-
based vehicular positioning: Opportunities, challenges, and future di-
rections,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 144–151, 2021.
[94] H. H. Esmat, B. Lorenzo, and W. Shi, “Toward resilient network slicing
for satellite–terrestrial edge computing IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
vol. 10, no. 16, pp. 14 621–14 645, 2023.
[95] M.
Y.
Abdelsadek,
A.
U.
Chaudhry,
T.
Darwish,
E.
Erdo-
gan,
G.
Karabulut-Kurt,
P.
G.
Madoery,
O.
Ben
Yahia,
and
H. Yanikomeroglu, “Future space networks: Toward the next giant leap
for humankind,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 949–1007,
2023.
[96] A. Lu, Y. Cheng, Y. Hu, Z. Cao, Y. Chen, and Z. Li, “Satellite-
terrestrial collaborative object detection via task-inspired framework,”
IEEE Internet Things J., pp. 1–1, 2023.
[97] Qualcomm,
“Transforming
the
connected
intelligent
edge
to
realize
5G’s
full
potential,”
[Online]
https://www.
qualcomm.com/content/dam/qcomm-martech/dm-assets/documents/
Transforming-the-connected-intelligent-edge.pdf, 2022.
[98] Huawei,
“Autonomous
driving
network,”
[Online]
https:
//carrier.huawei.com/∼/media/cnbgv2/download/products/networks/
ADN2023-white-paper-en.pdf, 2023.
[99] A. Geiger, P. Lenz, and R. Urtasun, “Are we ready for autonomous
driving? the KITTI vision benchmark suite,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vision Pattern Recogn. (CVPR), Providence, RI, USA, Jun.
16-21, 2012, pp. 3354–3361.
[100] R. Xu, H. Xiang, X. Xia, X. Han, J. Li, and J. Ma, “OPV2V: An open
benchmark dataset and fusion pipeline for perception with vehicle-
to-vehicle communication,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.
(ICRA), Philadelphia, PA, USA, May 23–27, 2022.
[101] Z. Wu, S. Song, A. Khosla, F. Yu, L. Zhang, X. Tang, and J. Xiao, “3D
shapenets: A deep representation for volumetric shapes,” in Proc. IEEE
Conf. Comput. Vision Pattern Recogn. (CVPR), Boston, MA, USA, Jun.
7-12, 2015.
[102] A. X. Chang, T. Funkhouser, L. Guibas, P. Hanrahan, Q. Huang, Z. Li,
S. Savarese, M. Savva, S. Song, H. Su, J. Xiao, L. Yi, and F. Yu,
“ShapeNet: An information-rich 3D model repository,” 2015.
[103] A. Z. Zhu, D. Thakur, T. ¨Ozaslan, B. Pfrommer, V. Kumar, and
K. Daniilidis, “The multivehicle stereo event camera dataset: An event
camera dataset for 3D perception,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 3,
no. 3, pp. 2032–2039, 2018.
[104] K. Chaney, F. Cladera, Z. Wang, A. Bisulco, M. A. Hsieh, C. Korpela,
V. Kumar, C. J. Taylor, and K. Daniilidis, “M3ED: Multi-robot, multi-
sensor, multi-environment event dataset,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vision Pattern Recogn. (CVPR), Vancouver, Canada, Jun. 18-22, 2023.
[105] 3GPP, “3rd generation partnership project; Technical specification
group services and system aspects; Study on traffic characteristics
and performance requirements for AI/ML model transfer in 5GS;
(Release 18),” 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), Technical
Specification (TS) 22.874, Dec. 2021, version 18.2.0.
[106] M. Feder and N. Merhav, “Relations between entropy and error
probability,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 259–266,
1994.
[107] Y. He, G. Yu, and Y. Cai, “Rate-adaptive coding mechanism for seman-
tic communications with multi-modal data,” IEEE Trans. Commun.,
vol. 72, no. 3, pp. 1385–1400, 2024.
[108] Sony, “Intelligent vision sensors (ai sensor),” [Online] https://www.
sony-semicon.com/en/technology/ivs/index.html, 2020.
[109] Z. Lin, G. Qu, X. Chen, and K. Huang, “Split learning in 6G edge
networks,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 170–176, 2024.
[110] Z. Lin, G. Zhu, Y. Deng, X. Chen, Y. Gao, K. Huang, and Y. Fang,
“Efficient parallel split learning over resource-constrained wireless
edge networks,” IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput., vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 9224–
9239, 2024.
[111] Z.
Lin,
W.
Wei,
Z.
Chen,
C.-T.
Lam,
X.
Chen,
Y.
Gao,
and J. Luo, “Hierarchical split federated learning: Convergence
analysis
and
system
optimization,”
2024.
[Online].
Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.07197
[112] J. Shao and J. Zhang, “Communication-computation trade-off in
resource-constrained edge inference,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 58,
no. 12, pp. 20–26, 2020.
43
[113] C. You, Y. Zeng, R. Zhang, and K. Huang, “Asynchronous mobile-edge
computation offloading: Energy-efficient resource management,” IEEE
Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 7590–7605, 2018.
[114] W. Fan, S. Li, J. Liu, Y. Su, F. Wu, and Y. Liu, “Joint task offloading
and resource allocation for accuracy-aware machine-learning-based iiot
applications,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 3305–3321,
2023.
[115] Q. Chen, S. Tang, Q. Yang, and S. Fu, “Cooper: Cooperative perception
for connected autonomous vehicles based on 3D point clouds,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Distrib. Comput. Syst. (ICDCS), Dallas, TX, USA, Jul. 7 –
9 2019, pp. 514–524.
[116] Y. Shao, C. Bian, L. Yang, Q. Yang, Z. Zhang, and D. G¨und¨uz, “Point
cloud in the air,” [Online] https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.00658, 2024.
[117] K. Huang, B. Shi, X. Li, X. Li, S. Huang, and Y. Li, “Multi-modal
sensor fusion for auto driving perception: A survey,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2202.02703, 2022.
[118] J. Deng, S. Shi, P. Li, W. Zhou, Y. Zhang, and H. Li, “Voxel
R-CNN: Towards high performance voxel-based 3D object detection,”
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 1201–1209, May 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/16207
[119] P. Neuhaus, N. Shlezinger, M. D¨orpinghaus, Y. C. Eldar, and G. Fet-
tweis, “Task-based analog-to-digital converters,” IEEE Trans. Signal
Process., vol. 69, pp. 5403–5418, 2021.
[120] N. Shlezinger, R. J. G. van Sloun, I. A. M. Huijben, G. Tsintsadze,
and Y. C. Eldar, “Learning task-based analog-to-digital conversion for
MIMO receivers,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal
Process. (ICASSP), Virtual Events, May 4–8 2020.
[121] Y. E. Sagduyu, S. Ulukus, and A. Yener, “Task-oriented communica-
tions for nextg: End-to-end deep learning and AI security aspects,”
IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 52–60, 2023.
[122] J. Huang, K. Yuan, C. Huang, and K. Huang, “D2-JSCC: Digital deep
joint source-channel coding for semantic communications,” to appear
in IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., 2024.
[123] C. Liu, C. Guo, Y. Yang, W. Ni, and T. Q. S. Quek, “OFDM-based
digital semantic communication with importance awareness,” IEEE
Trans. Commun., vol. 72, no. 10, pp. 6301–6315, 2024.
[124] S. Ma, W. Qiao, Y. Wu, H. Li, G. Shi, D. Gao, Y. Shi, S. Li, and
N. Al-Dhahir, “Task-oriented explainable semantic communications,”
IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 9248–9262, 2023.
[125] J. Kang, H. Du, Z. Li, Z. Xiong, S. Ma, D. Niyato, and Y. Li, “Per-
sonalized saliency in task-oriented semantic communications: Image
transmission and performance analysis,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun.,
vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 186–201, 2023.
[126] Y.-C. Liu, J. Tian, C.-Y. Ma, N. Glaser, C.-W. Kuo, and Z. Kira,
“Who2com: Collaborative perception via learnable handshake com-
munication,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA), Virtual
Events, May 13–Aug 31 2020.
[127] K. Huang, Q. Lan, Z. Liu, and L. Yang, “Semantic data sourcing for 6G
edge intelligence,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 61, no. 12, pp. 70–76,
2023.
[128] Y. Jia, R. Mao, Y. Sun, S. Zhou, and Z. Niu, “Mass: Mobility-aware
sensor scheduling of cooperative perception for connected automated
driving,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 11, pp. 14 962–14 977,
2023.
[129] Y. Hu, S. Fang, Z. Lei, Y. Zhong, and S. Chen, “Where2comm:
Communication-efficient collaborative perception via spatial confi-
dence maps,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), New
Orleans, LA, USA, Nov. 28–Dec. 9 2022.
[130] J. Choi and S. R. Pokhrel, “Federated learning with multichannel
ALOHA,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 499–502,
2020.
[131] H. Han, J. Zhao, and X. Zhou, “A random access scheme for federated
learning over massive MIMO systems,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
vol. 10, no. 21, pp. 19 027–19 042, 2023.
[132] M. Jankowski, D. G¨und¨uz, and K. Mikolajczyk, “Adaptive early exiting
for collaborative inference over noisy wireless channels,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Mach. Learn. Commun. Netw. (ICMLCN), Stockholm, Sweden,
May. 5–8, 2024.
[133] Y. Hu, Z. Li, Y. Chen, Y. Cheng, Z. Cao, and J. Liu, “Content-aware
adaptive device–cloud collaborative inference for object detection,”
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 21, pp. 19 087–19 101, 2023.
[134] X. Li, T. Zhang, S. Wang, G. Zhu, R. Wang, and T.-H. Chang, “Large-
scale bandwidth and power optimization for multi-modal edge intel-
ligence autonomous driving,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 12,
no. 6, pp. 1096–1100, 2023.
[135] H. Yang, Z. Wei, Z. Feng, C. Qiu, Z. Fang, X. Chen, and
P. Zhang, “Queue-aware dynamic resource allocation for the joint
communication-radar system,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70,
no. 1, pp. 754–767, 2021.
[136] D. Wen, P. Liu, G. Zhu, Y. Shi, J. Xu, Y. C. Eldar, and S. Cui,
“Task-oriented sensing, computation, and communication integration
for multi-device edge AI,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23,
no. 3, pp. 2486–2502, 2024.
[137] G. He, S. Cui, Y. Dai, and T. Jiang, “Learning task-oriented channel
allocation for multi-agent communication,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
vol. 71, no. 11, pp. 12 016–12 029, 2022.
[138] L. Su and V. K. N. Lau, “Decentralized sensor scheduling, bandwidth
allocation, and dynamic quantization for fl under hybrid data parti-
tioning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 21, pp. 21 214–21 231,
2022.
[139] J. Chen, C. Guo, R. Lin, and C. Feng, “Tasks-oriented joint resource
allocation scheme for the internet of vehicles with sensing, communi-
cation and computing integration,” China Commun., vol. 20, no. 3, pp.
27–42, 2023.
[140] C. Zhao, M. Sheng, J. Liu, T. Chu, and J. Li, “Energy-efficient power
control for multiple-task split inference in UAVs: A tiny learning-based
approach,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 21 146–21 157,
2024.
[141] C. Liu, C. Guo, Y. Yang, and N. Jiang, “Adaptable semantic compres-
sion and resource allocation for task-oriented communications,” IEEE
Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 769–782, 2024.
[142] B. Lu, X. Huang, Y. Wu, L. Qian, S. Zhou, and D. Niyato, “Joint
optimization of compression, transmission and computation for coop-
erative perception aided intelligent vehicular networks,” IEEE Trans.
Veh. Technol, pp. 1–14, 2025.
[143] Y. Shi, Y. Zhou, D. Wen, Y. Wu, C. Jiang, and K. B. Letaief, “Task-
oriented communications for 6G: Vision, principles, and technologies,”
IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 78–85, 2023.
[144] A. E. Kalør, P. Popovski, and K. Huang, “Random access protocols
for correlated IoT traffic activated by semantic queries,” in Proc. Int.
Symp. Model. Optim. Mob. Ad Hoc Wirel. Netw. (WiOpt), Singapore,
Aug. 24–27, 2023.
[145] X. Cao, G. Zhu, J. Xu, and K. Huang, “Cooperative interference
management for over-the-air computation networks,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 2634–2651, 2021.
[146] W. Liu, X. Zang, Y. Li, and B. Vucetic, “Over-the-air computation sys-
tems: Optimization, analysis and scaling laws,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., vol. 19, no. 8, p. 5488–5502, 2020.
[147] X. Zang, W. Liu, Y. Li, and B. Vucetic, “Over-the-air computation
systems: Optimal design with sum-power constraint,” IEEE Wireless
Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 9, p. 1524–1528, 2020.
[148] W. Liu, X. Zang, B. Vucetic, and Y. Li, “Over-the-air computation with
spatial-and-temporal correlated signals,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett.,
vol. 10, no. 7, pp. 1591–1595, 2021.
[149] W. Fang, Y. Jiang, Y. Shi, Y. Zhou, W. Chen, and K. B. Letaief, “Over-
the-air computation via reconfigurable intelligent surface,” IEEE Trans.
Commun., vol. 69, no. 12, pp. 8612–8626, 2021.
[150] Z. Liu, Q. Lan, A. E. Kalør, P. Popovski, and K. Huang, “Over-the-
air multi-view pooling for distributed sensing,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 7652–7667, Jul. 2024.
[151] Z. Zhang, W. Chen, Q. Wu, Z. Li, X. Zhu, and J. Yuan, “Intelligent
omni surfaces assisted integrated multi-target sensing and multi-user
MIMO communications,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 72, no. 8, pp.
4591–4606, 2024.
[152] G. Zhu, Y. Wang, and K. Huang, “Broadband analog aggregation for
low-latency federated edge learning,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 491–506, 2020.
[153] X. Cao, G. Zhu, J. Xu, and K. Huang, “Optimized power control for
over-the-air computation in fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., vol. 19, no. 11, pp. 7498–7513, 2020.
[154] N. Zhang and M. Tao, “Gradient statistics aware power control for over-
the-air federated learning,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20,
no. 8, pp. 5115–5128, 2021.
[155] M. Mohammadi Amiri and D. G¨und¨uz, “Machine learning at the
wireless edge: Distributed stochastic gradient descent over-the-air,”
IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 68, pp. 2155–2169, 2020.
[156] Z. Zhang, G. Zhu, R. Wang, V. K. N. Lau, and K. Huang, “Turning
channel noise into an accelerator for over-the-air principal component
analysis,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 7926–
7941, 2022.
44
[157] K. Yang, T. Jiang, Y. Shi, and Z. Ding, “Federated learning via over-
the-air computation,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 19, no. 3,
pp. 2022–2035, 2020.
[158] L. Su and V. K. N. Lau, “Data and channel-adaptive sensor scheduling
for federated edge learning via over-the-air gradient aggregation,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 1640–1654, 2022.
[159] J. Du, B. Jiang, C. Jiang, Y. Shi, and Z. Han, “Gradient and channel
aware dynamic scheduling for over-the-air computation in federated
edge learning systems,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 41, no. 4,
pp. 1035–1050, 2023.
[160] Y. Sun, Z. Lin, Y. Mao, S. Jin, and J. Zhang, “Channel and gradient-
importance aware device scheduling for over-the-air federated learn-
ing,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 6905–6920,
2024.
[161] Z. Lin, H. Liu, and Y.-J. A. Zhang, “CFLIT: Coexisting federated
learning and information transfer,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
vol. 22, no. 11, pp. 8436–8453, 2023.
[162] T. Qin, W. Liu, B. Vucetic, and Y. Li, “Over-the-air computation via
broadband channels,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 10, no. 10,
pp. 2150–2154, 2021.
[163] Q. Lan, H. S. Kang, and K. Huang, “Simultaneous signal-and-
interference alignment for two-cell over-the-air computation,” IEEE
Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 9, pp. 1342–1345, 2020.
[164] H. Zhang, L. Chen, N. Zhao, Y. Chen, and F. R. Yu, “Interference
management of analog function computation in multicluster networks,”
IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 70, no. 7, pp. 4607–4623, 2022.
[165] Z. Wang, K. Huang, and Y. C. Eldar, “Spectrum breathing: Protect-
ing over-the-air federated learning against interference,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 10 058–10 071, 2024.
[166] Y. Miao, W. Ni, and H. Tian, “One-bit aggregation for over-the-air
federated learning against byzantine attacks,” IEEE Signal Process.
Lett., vol. 31, pp. 1024–1028, 2024.
[167] M. Goldenbaum and S. Stanczak, “Robust analog function computation
via wireless multiple-access channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61,
no. 9, p. 3863–3877, 2013.
[168] Q. An, Y. Zhou, and Y. Shi, “Robust design for reconfigurable
intelligent surface assisted over-the-air computation,” in Proc. IEEE
Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf. (WCNC), Mar. 29 - Apr. 01 2021.
[169] W. Zhang, J. Xu, W. Xu, X. You, and W. Fu, “Worst-case design
for RIS-aided over-the-air computation with imperfect CSI,” IEEE
Commun. Lett., vol. 26, no. 9, p. 2136–2140, 2022.
[170] J. Dong, Y. Shi, and Z. Ding, “Blind over-the-air computation and
data fusion via provable wirtinger flow,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process.,
vol. 68, p. 1136–1151, 2020.
[171] G. Zhu, Y. Du, D. G¨und¨uz, and K. Huang, “One-bit over-the-air ag-
gregation for communication-efficient federated edge learning: Design
and convergence analysis,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20,
no. 3, pp. 2120–2135, 2021.
[172] J. Liu, Y. Gong, and K. Huang, “Digital over-the-air computation:
Achieving high reliability via bit-slicing,” [Online] https://arxiv.org/abs/
2404.07121, 2024.
[173] L. Chen, N. Zhao, Y. Chen, F. R. Yu, and G. Wei, “Over-the-air com-
putation for cooperative wideband spectrum sensing and performance
analysis,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 67, no. 11, p. 10603– 10614,
2018.
[174] U. Altun, S. T. Bas¸aran, H. Alakoca, and G. K. Kurt, “A testbed based
verification of joint communication and computation systems,” in Proc.
Telecommun. Forum (TELFOR), Nov. 21-22 2017.
[175] H. Guo, Y. Zhu, H. Ma, V. K. N. Lau, K. Huang, X. Li, H. Nong, and
M. Zhou, “Over-the-air aggregation for federated learning: Waveform
superposition and prototype validation,” J. Commun. Inf. Netw., vol. 6,
no. 4, p. 429–442, 2018.
[176] S. Sigg, P. Jakimovski, and M. Beigl, “Calculation of functions on the
RF-channel for IoT,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Internet Things (IOT),
Oct. 24-26 2012.
[177] A. Kortke, M. Goldenbaum, and S. Sta´nczak, “Analog computation
over the wireless channel: A proof of concept,” in Proc. IEEE SEN-
SORS, Nov. 2-5 2014.
[178] Y. Yang, Z. Zhang, Y. Tian, Z. Yang, C. Huang, C. Zhong, and K.-
K. Wong, “Over-the-air split machine learning in wireless MIMO
networks,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 1007–1022,
2023.
[179] Q. Wu, S. Zhang, B. Zheng, C. You, and R. Zhang, “Intelligent
reflecting surface-aided wireless communications: A tutorial,” IEEE
Trans. Commun., vol. 69, no. 5, pp. 3313–3351, 2021.
[180] Z. Zhuang, D. Wen, Y. Shi, G. Zhu, S. Wu, and D. Niyato, “Inte-
grated sensing-communication-computation for over-the-air edge AI
inference,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 3205–
3220, 2024.
[181] Y. Chen, G. Zhu, and J. Xu, “Over-the-air computation with imperfect
channel state information,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Signal Process.
Adv. Wireless Commun. (SPAWC), Jul. 4-6 2022.
[182] F. Ang, L. Chen, N. Zhao, Y. Chen, and F. R. Yu, “Robust design
for massive CSI acquisition in analog function computation networks,”
IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 68, no. 3, p. 2361–2373, 2019.
[183] J. Huang, Q. Zhang, Q. Li, and J. Qin, “Robust parallel analog
function computation via wireless multiple-access MIMO channels,”
IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 22, no. 9, p. 1297–1301, 2015.
[184] Y. Shao, D. G¨und¨uz, and S. C. Liew, “Federated edge learning with
misaligned over-the-air computation,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
vol. 21, no. 6, p. 3951–3964, 2022.
[185] N. Zhang, M. Tao, J. Wang, and S. Shao, “Coded over-the-air com-
putation for model aggregation in federated learning,” IEEE Commun.
Lett., vol. 27, no. 1, p. 160–164, 2023.
[186] X. Xie, C. Hua, J. Hong, and Y. Wei, “Joint design of coding and
modulation for digital over-the-air computation,” [Online] https://arxiv.
org/abs/2311.06829, 2023.
[187] S. Razavikia, J. M. Barros da Silva, and C. Fischione, “ChannelComp:
A general method for computation by communications,” IEEE Trans.
Commun., vol. 72, no. 2, pp. 692–706, 2024.
[188] S. Razavikia, J. M. B. D. S. J´unior, and C. Fischione, “SumComp:
Coding for digital over-the-air computation via the ring of integers,”
to appear in IEEE Trans. Commun., 2024.
[189] L. You, X. Zhao, R. Cao, Y. Shao, and L. Fu, “Broadband digital over-
the-air computation for wireless federated edge learning,” IEEE Trans.
Mob. Comput., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 5212–5228, 2024.
[190] J. Oh, D. Lee, D. Won, W. Noh, and S. Cho, “Communication-efficient
federated learning over-the-air with sparse one-bit quantization,” IEEE
Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 15 673–15 689, 2024.
[191] X. Chen, E. G. Larsson, and K. Huang, “On-the-fly communication-
and-computing for distributed tensor decomposition over mimo chan-
nels,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 71, pp. 4192–4206, 2023.
[192] T.-Y. Lin, P. Dollar, R. Girshick, K. He, B. Hariharan, and S. Belongie,
“Feature pyramid networks for object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog. (CVPR), Jul. 21-26 2017.
[193] C. Zhou, Y. Zhang, J. Chen, and D. Huang, “OcTr: Octree-based trans-
former for 3D object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recog. (CVPR), Jun. 17-24 2023.
[194] S. Biswas, J. Liu, K. Wong, S. Wang, and R. Urtasun, “MuSCLE: Multi
sweep compression of lidar using deep entropy models,” in Proc. Adv.
Neural Inform. Process. Syst., Dec. 6-12 2020.
[195] X. Chen, H. Wu, and K. Huang, “On-the-fly communication-and-
computing to enable representation learning for distributed point
clouds,” [Online] https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.20710, 2024.
[196] F. Liu, C. Masouros, A. P. Petropulu, H. Griffiths, and L. Hanzo, “Joint
radar and communication design: Applications, state-of-the-art, and the
road ahead,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 6, pp. 3834–3862,
2020.
[197] X. Chen, Z. Feng, Z. Wei, P. Zhang, and X. Yuan, “Code-division
OFDM joint communication and sensing system for 6G machine-type
communication,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 15, pp. 12 093–
12 105, 2021.
[198] A. Hassanien, M. G. Amin, Y. D. Zhang, and F. Ahmad, “Dual-function
radar-communications: Information embedding using sidelobe control
and waveform diversity,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 64, no. 8,
pp. 2168–2181, 2016.
[199] T. W. Tedesso and R. Romero, “Code shift keying based joint radar
and communications for EMCON applications,” Digit. Signal Process.,
vol. 80, p. 48–56, 2018.
[200] K. Wu, J. A. Zhang, X. Huang, Y. J. Guo, and R. W. Heath, “Waveform
design and accurate channel estimation for frequency-hopping MIMO
radar-based communications,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 69, no. 2,
pp. 1244–1258, 2021.
[201] X. Chen, X. Wang, S. Xu, and J. Zhang, “A novel radar waveform
compatible with communication,” in IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Problem-
Solving (ICCP), Oct. 21-25 2011, pp. 177–181.
[202] Q. Li, K. Dai, Y. Zhang, and H. Zhang, “Integrated waveform for a
joint radar-communication system with high-speed transmission,” IEEE
Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 1208–1211, 2019.
[203] N. Mehrotra and A. Sabharwal, “On the degrees of freedom region for
simultaneous imaging & uplink communication,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun., vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 1768–1779, 2022.
45
[204] Y. Xiong, F. Liu, Y. Cui, W. Yuan, T. X. Han, and G. Caire, “On the
fundamental tradeoff of integrated sensing and communications under
gaussian channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 69, no. 9, pp. 5723–
5751, 2023.
[205] F. Liu, C. Masouros, A. Li, H. Sun, and L. Hanzo, “MU-MIMO
communications with MIMO radar: From co-existence to joint trans-
mission,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 2755–
2770, 2018.
[206] S. Damith Liyanaarachchi, C. Baquero Barneto, T. Riihonen, M. Heino,
and M. Valkama, “Joint multi-user communication and MIMO radar
through full-duplex hybrid beamforming,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Online
Sympo. on Joint Commun. Sens. (JC&S), Deb. 23-24 2021.
[207] S. H. Dokhanchi, B. S. Mysore R, M. Kobayashi, and B. Ottersten,
“Multicasting precoder design for vehicular joint radar-communication
systems,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Online Sympo. on Joint Commun. Sens.
(JC&S), Deb. 23-24 2021.
[208] P. Wang, D. Han, Y. Cao, W. Ni, and D. Niyato, “Multi-objective
optimization-based waveform design for multi-user and multi-target
MIMO-ISAC systems,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 10,
pp. 15 339–15 352, 2024.
[209] M. F. Keskin, V. Koivunen, and H. Wymeersch, “Limited feedforward
waveform design for OFDM dual-functional radar-communications,”
IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 69, pp. 2955–2970, 2021.
[210] R. Schlegel, S. Kumar, E. Rosnes, and A. Graell i Amat, “Privacy-
preserving coded mobile edge computing for low-latency distributed
inference,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 788–799,
2022.
[211] C. Xu, J. Ren, L. She, Y. Zhang, Z. Qin, and K. Ren, “EdgeSanitizer:
Locally differentially private deep inference at the edge for mobile data
analytics,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 5140–5151, 2019.
[212] J. Li, G. Liao, L. Chen, and X. Chen, “Roulette: A semantic privacy-
preserving device-edge collaborative inference framework for deep
learning classification tasks,” IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput., vol. 23, no. 5,
pp. 5494–5510, 2024.
[213] D. Liu and O. Simeone, “Privacy for free: Wireless federated learning
via uncoded transmission with adaptive power control,” IEEE J. Sel.
Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 170–185, 2021.
[214] S. F. Yilmaz, B. Hasırcıo˘glu, and D. G¨und¨uz, “Over-the-air ensemble
inference with model privacy,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory
(ISIT), Jun. 26 - July 1 2022.
[215] S. Park and W. Choi, “On the differential privacy in federated learning
based on over-the-air computation,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 4269–4283, 2024.
[216] M. Seif, Y. Nie, A. J. Goldsmith, and H. V. Poor, “Collaborative
inference over wireless channels with feature differential privacy,”
2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.19917
[217] Y. Tao, S. Chen, C. Zhang, D. Wang, D. Yu, X. Cheng, and F. Dressler,
“Private over-the-air federated learning at band-limited edge,” IEEE
Trans. Mob. Comput., vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 12 444–12 460, 2024.
[218] H. Wu, X. Chen, and K. Huang, “Device-edge cooperative fine-tuning
of foundation models as a 6G service,” IEEE Wireless Commun.,
vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 60–67, 2024.
[219] S. Pitis, M. R. Zhang, A. Wang, and J. Ba, “Boosted prompt ensembles
for large language models,” [Online] https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.05970,
2023.
[220] N. Halko, P. G. Martinsson, and J. A. Tropp, “Finding structure
with randomness: Probabilistic algorithms for constructing approximate
matrix decompositions,” SIAM Rev., vol. 53, no. 2, p. 217–288, 2011.
[221] Y. Xiong, F. Liu, Y. Cui, W. Yuan, T. X. Han, and G. Caire, “On the
fundamental tradeoff of integrated sensing and communications under
gaussian channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 69, no. 9, pp. 5723–
5751, 2023.
[222] P. Klasnja, S. Consolvo, T. Choudhury, R. Beckwith, and J. Hightower,
“Exploring privacy concerns about personal sensing,” in IEEE Int.
Conf. Pervasive Comput. Commun., Hong Kong, March 17-21 2009,
pp. 176–183.
[223] K. Zhang, J. Ni, K. Yang, X. Liang, J. Ren, and X. S. Shen, “Security
and privacy in smart city applications: Challenges and solutions,” IEEE
Commun. Mag., vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 122–129, 2017.
[224] Y. Yang, L. Wu, G. Yin, L. Li, and H. Zhao, “A survey on security and
privacy issues in internet-of-things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 4,
no. 5, pp. 1250–1258, 2017.
[225] J. Xiong, R. Ma, L. Chen, Y. Tian, Q. Li, X. Liu, and Z. Yao, “A
personalized privacy protection framework for mobile crowdsensing in
iiot,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 4231–4241, 2020.
[226] H. Fang, Y. Qiu, H. Yu, W. Yu, J. Kong, B. Chong, B. Chen,
X. Wang, S.-T. Xia, and K. Xu, “Privacy leakage on DNNs: A survey
of model inversion attacks and defenses,” 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.04013
[227] J. Qiao, S. Shen, S. Chen, X. Zhang, T. Lan, X. Cheng, and D. Yu,
“De-rpota: Decentralized learning with resource adaptation and pri-
vacy preservation through over-the-air computation,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
Netw., pp. 1–13, 2024.
[228] E. D. Carvalho, A. Ali, A. Amiri, M. Angjelichinoski, and R. W. Heath,
“Non-stationarities in extra-large-scale massive MIMO,” IEEE Wireless
Commun., vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 74–80, 2020.
[229] C.
Nelson,
X.
Li,
T.
Wilding,
B.
Deutschmann,
K.
Witrisal,
and
F. Tufvesson,
“Large
intelligent
surface measurements
for
joint
communication
and
sensing,”
2023.
[Online].
Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.12457
[230] M. Cui, Z. Wu, Y. Lu, X. Wei, and L. Dai, “Near-field MIMO
communications for 6G: Fundamentals, challenges, potentials, and
future directions,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 40–46,
2023.
[231] D. M. Sheen, D. L. McMakin, and T. E. Hall, “Three-dimensional
millimeter-wave imaging for concealed weapon detection,” IEEE Trans.
Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 49, no. 9, pp. 1581–1592, 2001.
[232] J. Li and P. Stoica, MIMO Radar Signal Processing.
Wiley-IEEE
Press, 2009.
[233] H. Lei, J. Zhang, H. Xiao, D. W. K. Ng, and B. Ai, “Deep learning-
based near-field user localization with beam squint in wideband XL-
MIMO systems,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 24, no. 2, pp.
1568–1583, 2025.
[234] M. Cui, Z. Wu, Y. Lu, X. Wei, and L. Dai, “Near-field MIMO
communications for 6G: Fundamentals, challenges, potentials, and
future directions,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 40–46,
2023.
[235] S. Helal, H. Sarieddeen, H. Dahrouj, T. Y. Al-Naffouri, and M.-
S. Alouini, “Signal processing and machine learning techniques for
terahertz sensing: An overview,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 39,
no. 5, p. 42–62, 2022.
[236] S. Kim, J. Moon, J. Wu, B. Shim, and M. Z. Win, “Vision-aided
positioning and beam focusing for 6G terahertz communications,” IEEE
J. Sel. Areas in Commun., vol. 42, no. 9, pp. 2503–2519, 2024.
[237] S. Kim, Y. Ahn, D. Park, and B. Shim, “VOMTC: Vision objects
for millimeter and terahertz communications,” IEEE Trans. Cogn.
Commun. Netw., 2024.
[238] Q. Wu, S. Zhang, B. Zheng, C. You, and R. Zhang, “Intelligent
reflecting surface-aided wireless communications: A tutorial,” IEEE
Trans. Commun., vol. 69, no. 5, pp. 3313–3351, 2021.
[239] E. Basar, M. Di Renzo, J. De Rosny, M. Debbah, M.-S. Alouini, and
R. Zhang, “Wireless communications through reconfigurable intelligent
surfaces,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 116 753–116 773, 2019.
[240] X. Yuan, Y.-J. A. Zhang, Y. Shi, W. Yan, and H. Liu, “Reconfigurable-
intelligent-surface empowered wireless communications: Challenges
and opportunities,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 136–
143, 2021.
[241] X. Shao, C. You, and R. Zhang, “Intelligent reflecting surface aided
wireless sensing: Applications and design issues,” IEEE Wireless
Commun., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 383–389, 2024.
[242] X. Shao, C. You, W. Ma, X. Chen, and R. Zhang, “Target sensing with
intelligent reflecting surface: Architecture and performance,” IEEE J.
Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 40, no. 7, pp. 2070–2084, 2022.
[243] Q. Wu and R. Zhang, “Intelligent reflecting surface enhanced wireless
network via joint active and passive beamforming,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun., vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 5394–5409, 2019.
[244] D. Han, P. Wang, W. Ni, W. Wang, A. Zheng, D. Niyato, and N. Al-
Dhahir, “Multi-functional RIS integrated sensing and communications
for 6G networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 24, no. 2, pp.
1146–1161, 2025.
[245] W. Ni, W. Wang, A. Zheng, P. Wang, C. You, Y. C. Eldar, D. Niyato,
and R. Schober, “Two birds with one stone: Enhancing communication
and sensing via multi-functional RIS,” 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.06584
[246] B. Denby and B. Lucia, “Orbital edge computing: Machine inference
in space,” IEEE Comput. Archit. Lett., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 59–62, 2019.
[247] B. Zhu, S. Lin, Y. Zhu, and X. Wang, “Collaborative hyperspectral
image processing using satellite edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Mob.
Comput., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 2241–2253, 2024.
[248] X. Gao, R. Liu, and A. Kaushik, “Virtual network function placement
in satellite edge computing with a potential game approach,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1243–1259, 2022.
46
[249] C. Lei, W. Feng, J. Wang, S. Jin, and N. Ge, “Control-oriented
power allocation for integrated satellite-UAV networks,” IEEE Wireless
Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 883–887, 2023.
[250] Y. Wang, S. Yang, X. Ren, P. Zhao, C. Zhao, and X. Yang, “Industedge:
A time-sensitive networking enabled edge-cloud collaborative intelli-
gent platform for smart industry,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 18,
no. 4, pp. 2386–2398, 2022.
[251] G. Peng, S. Wang, Y. Huang, T. Huang, and Y. Liu, “Enabling
deterministic tasks with multi-access edge computing in 5g networks,”
IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 60, no. 8, pp. 36–42, 2022.
[252] A. Kirillov, E. Mintun, N. Ravi, H. Mao, C. Rolland, L. Gustafson,
T. Xiao, S. Whitehead, A. C. Berg, W.-Y. Lo et al., “Segment any-
thing,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Vancouver,
Canada, June 18–22 2023, pp. 4015–4026.
[253] Y. Yang, X. Wu, T. He, H. Zhao, and X. Liu, “SAM3D: Segment any-
thing in 3D scenes,” [Online] https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.03908, 2023.
[254] J. Li, H. Dai, H. Han, and Y. Ding, “Mseg3d: Multi-modal 3D semantic
segmentation for autonomous driving,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., Vancouver, Canada, June 18–22 2023, pp.
21 694–21 704.
[255] M. Xu, D. Niyato, H. Zhang, J. Kang, Z. Xiong, S. Mao, and
Z. Han, “Joint foundation model caching and inference of generative
AI services for edge intelligence,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf.,
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, December 4–8 2023, pp. 3548–3553.
[256] Y. Shen, J. Shao, X. Zhang, Z. Lin, H. Pan, D. Li, J. Zhang, and
K. B. Letaief, “Large language models empowered autonomous edge
AI for connected intelligence,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 62, no. 10,
pp. 140–146, Oct. 2024.
[257] H. Du, R. Zhang, D. Niyato, J. Kang, Z. Xiong, D. I. Kim, X. Shen,
and H. V. Poor, “Exploring collaborative distributed diffusion-based AI-
generated content (AIGC) in wireless networks,” IEEE Netw., vol. 38,
no. 3, pp. 178–186, 2024.
[258] X. Tu, H. Li, and H. S. Dhillon, “Information-theoretic analysis of
vision-aided ISAC over a discrete memoryless channel,” in Proc. IEEE
100th Veh. Tech. Conference (VTC2024-Fall), Washington, DC, USA,
Oct. 7–10, 2024.
[259] Y. Lu, W. Mao, H. Du, O. A. Dobre, D. Niyato, and Z. Ding,
“Semantic-aware vision-assisted integrated sensing and communica-
tion: Architecture and resource allocation,” IEEE Wireless Commun.,
vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 302–308, Jun. 2024.
[260] X. Jin, G. Li, S. Wang, M. Wen, C. Xu, and H. V. Poor, “Integrated
sensing and communication for edge inference with end-to-end multi-
view fusion,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 2040–
2044, Aug. 2024.
[261] N. Huang, H. Dong, C. Dou, Y. Wu, L. Qian, S. Ma, and R. Lu, “Edge
intelligence oriented integrated sensing and communication: A multi-
cell cooperative approach,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 6,
pp. 8810–8824, Jun. 2024.
[262] W. Xu, C. Zhao, and F. Gao, “Angle domain channel-based camera pose
correction for vision-aided ISAC systems,” IEEE Wireless Commun.
Lett., vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 2080–2084, Aug. 2024.
[263] G. Durisi, T. Koch, and P. Popovski, “Toward massive, ultrareliable, and
low-latency wireless communication with short packets,” Proc. IEEE,
vol. 104, no. 9, pp. 1711–1726, 2016.
[264] Y. Polyanskiy, H. V. Poor, and S. Verd´u, “Channel coding rate in the
finite blocklength regime,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 5, pp.
2307–2359, May 2010.
[265] P. Popovski et al., “Wireless access in ultra-reliable low-latency com-
munication (URLLC),” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 67, no. 8, pp. 5783–
5801, Aug. 2019.
[266] H. Ren, C. Pan, Y. Deng, M. Elkashlan, and A. Nallanathan, “Joint
power and blocklength optimization for URLLC in a factory automa-
tion scenario,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 1786–
1801, Mar. 2020.
[267] Y. Zhao, J. Hu, K. Yang, and X. Wei, “A joint communication
and control system for URLLC in industrial IoT,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vol. 72, no. 11, pp. 15 074–15 079, Jun. 2023.
[268] J. ¨Ostman, G. Durisi, E. G. Str¨om, M. C. Cos¸kun, and G. Liva,
“Short packets over block-memoryless fading channels: Pilot-assisted
or noncoherent transmission?” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 67, no. 2,
pp. 1521–1536, Feb. 2018.
[269] K. F. Trillingsgaard and P. Popovski, “Downlink transmission of
short packets: framing and control information revisited,” IEEE Trans.
Commun., vol. 65, no. 5, pp. 2048–2061, 2017.
[270] C. She, C. Yang, and T. Q. Quek, “Joint uplink and downlink resource
configuration for ultra-reliable and low-latency communications,” IEEE
Trans. Commun., vol. 66, no. 5, pp. 2266–2280, 2018.
[271] Y. Hu, Y. Zhu, M. C. Gursoy, and A. Schmeink, “SWIPT-enabled
relaying in IoT networks operating with finite blocklength codes,” IEEE
J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 74–88, 2018.
[272] Z. Wang, A. E. Kalør, Y. Zhou, P. Popovski, and K. Huang,
“Ultra-low-latency edge inference for distributed sensing,” 2024.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.13360
[273] Q. Zeng, J. Huang, Z. Wang, K. Huang, and K. K. Leung, “Ultra-
low-latency edge intelligent sensing: A source-channel tradeoff and
its application to coding rate adaptation,” 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.04645
[274] Q. Zeng, Z. Wang, Y. Zhou, H. Wu, L. Yang, and K. Huang,
“Knowledge-based ultra-low-latency semantic communications for
robotic edge intelligence,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 73, no. 7, pp.
4925–4940, Jul. 2025.
[275] Q. Chen, X. Ma, S. Tang, J. Guo, Q. Yang, and S. Fu, “F-Cooper:
Feature based cooperative perception for autonomous vehicle edge
computing system using 3D point clouds,” in Proc. ACM/IEEE Symp.
Edge Comput., Washington, DC, USA, Nov. 7–9, 2019.
[276] R. Xu, H. Xiang, X. Xia, X. Han, J. Li, and J. Ma, “OPV2V: An open
benchmark dataset and fusion pipeline for perception with vehicle-
to-vehicle communication,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.
(ICRA), Philadelphia, PA, USA, May 23–27, 2022.
[277] Y. Li, D. Ma, Z. An, Z. Wang, Y. Zhong, S. Chen, and C. Feng, “V2X-
Sim: Multi-agent collaborative perception dataset and benchmark for
autonomous driving,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 7, no. 4, pp.
10 914–10 921, Jul. 2022.
[278] H. Wu, R. He, H. Tan, X. Qi, and K. Huang, “Vertical layering of
quantized neural networks for heterogeneous inference,” IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 12, pp. 15 964–15 978, Dec.
2023.
[279] Ouster, “Os2 long-range high-resolution imaging lidar,” [Online] https:
//data.ouster.io/downloads/datasheets/datasheet-rev7-v2p5-os2.pdf,
2025.
[280] Q. Wang, Y. Chen, J. Liang, and X. Ma, “A new joint source-channel
coding for short-packet communications,” IEEE Trans. Commun.,
vol. 72, no. 1, pp. 28–37, Jan. 2024.
[281] X. Yu, D. Li, N. Zhang, and X. Shen, “A novel lightweight joint source-
channel coding design in semantic communications,” IEEE Internet
Things J., vol. 12, no. 11, pp. 18 447–18 450, Jun. 2025.
[282] J. Shao, J. Tong, Q. Wu, W. Guo, Z. Li, Z. Lin, and J. Zhang,
“WirelessLLM: Empowering large language models towards wireless
intelligence,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.17053, 2024.
[283] H. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Liu, K. Sun, and Y. Zhang, “Resource
allocation and mobility management for perceptive mobile networks
in 6G,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 223–229, Aug.
2024.
[284] Q. Zeng, J. Liu, M. Jiang, J. Lan, Y. Gong, Z. Wang, Y. Li, C. Li,
J. Ignowski, and K. Huang, “Realizing in-memory baseband processing
for ultrafast and energy-efficient 6G,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11,
no. 3, pp. 5169–5183, Feb. 2024.
Zhiyan Liu (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) re-
ceived the B.Eng. degree from the Dept. of Elec-
tronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, in
2021. He is currently working towards the Ph.D.
degree with Dept. of Electrical and Electronic Engi-
neering, The University of Hong Kong (HKU), Hong
Kong. His recent research interests include edge
intelligence and distributed sensing in 6G wireless
networks. He was a recipient of Hong Kong Ph.D.
Fellowship.
47
Xu Chen received the B.Eng. and M.Eng. degrees
from Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT), Harbin,
China, in 2020, and the Ph.D. degree from The
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, in 2024. He
is currently a senior standard engineer with Xiaomi
Communications Co., Ltd.. He is a recipient of
Hong Kong PhD Fellowship (HKPF). His research
interests include wireless communications and AI
for wireless.
Hai Wu received the B.Eng. degree from Southern
University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, in
2020, and the Ph.D. degree from The University
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, in 2024. His recent
research interests include deep learning and efficient
deployment of artificial intelligence.
Zhanwei Wang (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
received the B.Eng. degree in Information Engi-
neering and the M.Eng. degree in Information and
Communication Engineering from Xidian Univer-
sity, Xi’an, China, in 2018 and 2021, respectively.
He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in the De-
partment of Electrical and Electronic Engineering at
The University of Hong Kong. His research interests
include wireless communications, edge intelligence,
distributed sensing, and atomic receiver.
Xianhao Chen (Member, IEEE) received the B.Eng.
degree in electronic information from Southwest
Jiaotong University in 2017, and the Ph.D. degree
in electrical and computer engineering from the
University of Florida in 2022. He is currently an
assistant professor at the Department of Electrical
and Electronic Engineering, the University of Hong
Kong, where he directs the Wireless Information
& Intelligence (WILL) Lab. He serves as a TPC
member of several international conferences and an
Associate Editor of ACM Computing Surveys. He
received the Early Career Award from the Research Grants Council (RGC)
of Hong Kong in 2024, the ECE Graduate Excellence Award for research
from the University of Florida in 2022, and the ICCC Best Paper Award in
2023. His research interests include wireless networking, edge intelligence,
and machine learning.
Dusit Niyato (M’09-SM’15-F’17) is a professor
in the College of Computing and Data Science,
at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
He received B.Eng. from King Mongkuts Institute
of Technology Ladkrabang (KMITL), Thailand and
Ph.D. in Electrical and Computer Engineering from
the University of Manitoba, Canada. His research
interests are in the areas of mobile generative AI,
edge intelligence, quantum computing and network-
ing, and incentive mechanism design.
Kaibin Huang (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.Eng.
and M.Eng. degrees from the National University of
Singapore and the Ph.D. degree from The University
of Texas at Austin, all in electrical engineering. He
is the Philip K H Wong Wilson K L Wong Professor
in Electrical Engineering and the Department Head
at the Dept. of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
The University of Hong Kong (HKU), Hong Kong.
His work was recognized with seven Best Paper
awards from the IEEE Communication Society. He
is a member of the Engineering Panel of Hong Kong
Research Grants Council (RGC) and a RGC Research Fellow (2021 Class).
He has served on the editorial boards of five major journals in the area of
wireless communications and co-edited ten journal special issues. He has been
active in organizing international conferences such as the 2014, 2017, and
2023 editions of IEEE Globecom, a flagship conference in communication.
He has been named as a Highly Cited Researcher by Clarivate in the last
six years (2019-2024) and an AI 2000 Most Influential Scholar (Top 30 in
Internet of Things) in 2023-2024. He was an IEEE Distinguished Lecturer.
He is a Fellow of the IEEE and the U.S. National Academy of Inventors.
