Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Computer Networks
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/comnet
MAE: Collaborative inference acceleration with eﬃcient DNN partitioning 
and resource allocation in resource-constrained edge computing
Juan Fang
, Yaxin An
, Yaqi Liu
, Ziyi Teng
, Xiaoning Zhai
, Heng Tang
, 
Huijie Chen
∗
College of Computer Science, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, 100124, China
a r t i c l e  i n f o
Keywords:
Collaborative inference
DNN partitioning
Resource allocation
Edge computing
 
a b s t r a c t
Mobile Edge Computing (MEC) serves as a critical architecture that empowers resource-constrained mobile ter-
minals to provide neural network driven edge intelligence services. Its core challenge centers on addressing the 
eﬃciency bottleneck of Deep Neural Network (DNN) inference in edge-device collaboration scenarios. Although 
existing DNN partitioning techniques facilitate the cooperative deployment of computation-intensive DNNs be-
tween User Equipment (UEs) and edge servers (ES), these techniques impose a theoretical upper bound on opti-
mal inference latency since they fundamentally fail to modify the DNN structure. Inspired by the widely adopted 
Mixture of Experts (MoE) paradigm, we introduce the Mixture of Adaptive Experts (MAE) framework, which is 
speciﬁcally designed for heterogeneous collaborative DNN inference in resource-constrained edge computing en-
vironments. Speciﬁcally, MAE reconﬁgures convolutional channels as specialized "experts"; that is, only a sparse 
subset of these convolutional channels are activated during each inference process. This design signiﬁcantly 
reduces intermediate feature transmission overhead while preserving model accuracy. Furthermore, MAE facil-
itates eﬃcient model partitioning and the subsequent selection of expert models. Notably, MAE fundamentally 
transforms the computationally intractable resource scheduling challenge into an optimization problem deﬁned 
by a monotonically decreasing function. To address this optimization problem, we propose an algorithm called 
MAE resource allocation which is capable of achieving the optimal solution in logarithmic time. Large-scale 
experiments on real-world heterogeneous DNN tasks showcase that our solution signiﬁcantly improves overall 
system performance while guaranteeing inference accuracy, thereby conclusively validating its eﬀectiveness and 
eﬃciency in practical edge computing environments.
1.  Introduction
The rapid advancement of Internet of Things (IoT) technology has 
driven an explosion in data generated by User Equipment (UEs) (e.g., 
smartphones, wearables, sensors), creating an urgent demand for real-
time processing by Deep Learning (DL) applications [1]. However, these 
devices are inherently constrained by limited computational resources, 
storage capacity, and battery life, rendering them incapable of indepen-
dently executing complex DL inference tasks [2]. Against this backdrop, 
Edge Intelligence (EI) has emerged as a critical solution: it enables DL in-
ference capabilities at the network edge, thereby facilitating low-latency 
and high-eﬃciency processing in close proximity to data sources [3].
By deploying GPU-accelerated computational resources at the net-
work edge, edge servers (ES) allow UEs to oﬄoad computation-intensive 
DL inference tasks for remote execution, with the processed results then 
∗Corresponding author.
 
E-mail addresses: fangjuan@bjut.edu.cn (J. Fang), an-ya-xin@emails.bjut.edu.cn (Y. An), liuyq617@emails.bjut.edu.cn (Y. Liu), tengziyi@emails.bjut.edu.cn (Z. 
Teng), ZXNTT@emails.bjut.edu.cn (X. Zhai), tangheng@emails.bjut.edu.cn (H. Tang), chenhuijie@bjut.edu.cn (H. Chen).
returned to the UEs [4,5]. As the primary computational workload in 
such DL tasks, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) confront critical chal-
lenges in real-time execution at the network edge stemming from both 
their inherent computational complexity and resource constraints on ES. 
To mitigate these challenges, two dominant paradigms have thus been 
widely adopted in edge-assisted DNN inference: Full Oﬄoading to ES 
and Partition-based Collaborative Inference.
Full oﬄoading to ES addresses the inherent computational complex-
ity of DNNs by oﬄoading and executing entire models on powerful GPU-
equipped ES. By leveraging edge-side parallel computing capabilities, 
this paradigm eﬀectively accelerates the inference of computationally 
intensive DNN layers [6]. However, in scenarios where GPU resources 
are scarce, newly incoming inference tasks are forced to queue for avail-
able computing resources, resulting in considerable scheduling delays 
during peak load periods [7]. This queuing eﬀect not only prolongs
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2026.112073
Received 22 October 2025; Received in revised form 28 December 2025; Accepted 29 January 2026
Computer Networks 278 (2026) 112073 
Available online 3 February 2026 
1389-1286/© 2026 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
J. Fang et al.
end-to-end latency, but also leads to the underutilization of idle compu-
tational resources on UEs. Furthermore, the transmission of unprocessed 
raw input data (e.g., high-resolution medical images or LiDAR point 
cloud scans) often becomes the dominant contributor to end-to-end
latency. Under unstable network conditions, this resulting communica-
tion overhead frequently emerges as the primary factor driving overall 
end-to-end delay [8].
Meanwhile, existing works have leveraged pruning and distillation 
techniques to reduce the computational complexity of DNN models [9]. 
For instance, Bailey et al. proposed DNNShifter [10], a framework that 
combines the advantages of unstructured and structured pruning to en-
able the rapid generation of task-adapted lightweight DNN variants. This 
design allows the model to adapt to the resource constraints of edge 
devices while supporting eﬃcient model switching. Majid et al. intro-
duced a feature-based knowledge distillation method using Tucker de-
composition [11], a technique that decomposes the high-dimensional 
feature maps of the teacher model into core tensors and employs an 
adapter function to align spatial dimensions. This approach thereby en-
ables the student model to attain accuracy comparable to that of the 
teacher model, while signiﬁcantly reducing both parameter count and 
computational cost.
Partition-based collaborative inference fundamentally redeﬁnes 
edge-device collaboration by leveraging the sequential layer architec-
ture of DNNs, where each layer’s output serves as the next layer’s in-
put. This approach delivers signiﬁcant advantages over full oﬄoading. 
Primarily, it eliminates the transmission bottleneck by replacing high-
dimensional raw input data with progressively compressed intermediate 
features, thereby drastically reducing communication overhead and la-
tency [12]. Furthermore, it optimizes computational eﬃciency through 
strategic layer allocation: compute-intensive layers are oﬄoaded to 
GPU-equipped ES, while lightweight layers are retained on User Equip-
ment (UEs). This allocation strategy harnesses underutilized terminal 
resources and alleviates ES congestion, ultimately reducing queuing de-
lays [13,14].
Subsequent studies have extended this framework to multi-task sce-
narios [13–17], among which [13] proposes a layer-level scheduling 
algorithm that is theoretically optimal for tree-structured computation 
graphs. Despite these advancements, scaling partitioned inference to 
multi-DNN workloads remains fundamentally challenged by resource 
contention in capacity-constrained ES. Eﬃcient resource allocation is 
thus crucial for balancing heterogeneous DNN execution across shared 
edge infrastructure. However, current approaches suﬀer from two com-
pounding limitations: (1) Partition conﬁgurations grow exponentially 
due to the architectural heterogeneity of DNNs, rendering exact opti-
mization computationally intractable; (2) State-of-the-art DNNs exhibit 
inherent computational intensity, which imposes an inherent perfor-
mance ceiling even under optimal partitioning.
To address these limitations, we leverage the critical insight that 
end-to-end inference latency is predominantly dictated by the volume 
of intermediate feature transmission [12]. Consequently, minimizing 
this transmission data is paramount to reducing overall delay. To this 
end, we propose the Mixture of Adaptive Experts (MAE), a specialized 
Mixture of Experts (MoE) adaptation tailored for resource-constrained 
edge environments. Diverging from conventional edge MoE solutions 
that treat experts as independent models or server-side entities, MAE 
redeﬁnes experts as sparse convolutional channel subsets within the 
DNN. By employing structured sparsity, MAE directly mitigates the 
communication bottleneck in collaborative edge inference rather than 
relying on peripheral optimizations such as task scheduling or long-
term learning. This design drastically reduces communication overhead 
while maintaining inference accuracy, providing a robust adaptation for 
bandwidth-limited edge networks.
Building upon this architectural innovation, the MAE framework fa-
cilitates eﬃcient collaborative DNN inference in edges. As illustrated in 
Fig. 1, the DNN model is divided into two parts at a predeﬁned parti-
tion point. Subsequently, the MAE framework converts the neural layer 
in DNN preceding this partition point into an MoE layer. Within the 
MoE layer, diﬀerent activations of convolutional channels are mapped 
to distinct expert models. To select appropriate expert models, the MAE 
framework activates the minimum number of convolutional channels 
in the MoE layer while ensuring inference accuracy is preserved. Ad-
ditionally, this framework eﬃciently determines the optimal partition 
point for expert models in edge-device collaborative inference scenar-
ios. Furthermore, computational resources of ES that provide comput-
ing services are quantiﬁed as Minimum Computational Resource Units 
(MCRUs). These MCRUs are dynamically allocated in accordance with 
the actual computational demands of heterogeneous expert models, 
thereby signiﬁcantly reducing the maximum inference latency of het-
erogeneous DNNs.
To comprehensively evaluate the eﬃcacy and robustness of MAE, ex-
tensive experiments were conducted in an ES environment with hetero-
geneous DNN workloads. Experimental results demonstrate that this in-
novative approach breaks through the computational performance ceil-
ing via sparse expert activation and eliminates partitioning complexity 
through architectural sparsity. The principal contributions of this work 
are articulated as follows:
Expert Model Designed for EI: We architect specialized MoE experts for 
collaborative edge intelligence via the activation of disparate channels, 
demonstrating that such designs simultaneously surpass the accuracy 
of policy models and extend the theoretical latency-accuracy frontier, a 
critical advancement for resource-constrained multi-task environments.
Framework Innovation: We propose Mixture of Adaptive Experts 
(MAE), a novel architecture that dynamically allocates constrained ES 
resources in response to ﬂuctuating computational capacities and mo-
bile task demands. MAE breaks through the algorithmic time complexity 
barrier of existing intelligent partition decision-making schemes while 
substantially reducing maximum inference latency without compromis-
ing model accuracy.
Prototyping and Experimental Validation: We implement an end-to-
end hardware-software prototype of the MAE framework, deploying di-
verse heterogeneous DNNs across UEs. Rigorous experiments validate 
MAE under systematically varied workload conditions, including scal-
ing heterogeneous task volumes and modulating task-type composition 
ratios. These tests conclusively demonstrate MAE’s operational stabil-
ity and robustness to workload dynamics. Standard benchmark evalua-
tions [18] further conﬁrm MAE’s superiority over state-of-the-art base-
lines, achieving signiﬁcant reductions in inference latency and notable 
improvements in resource utilization eﬃciency.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews 
related works and highlights the innovation of the proposed framework. 
Sections 3 and 4 formulate the resource-constrained optimization prob-
lem and the MAE framework’s core algorithm with rigorous theoret-
ical analysis and proofs respectively. Section 5 evaluates system per-
formance through extensive experiments on a physical edge platform. 
Section 6 concludes this paper and outlines future work.
2.  Related work
2.1.  Edge-device collaborative DNN inference acceleration
The sequential layer-wise structure of DNNs has motivated exten-
sive research on device-edge collaborative inference, primarily through 
layer partitioning. Kang et al. [12] introduced the Neurosurgeon frame-
work to identify optimal partition points via exhaustive search, reducing 
inference latency in single-user scenarios. However, it lacks scalability 
for multi-user environments. Duan et al. [13] extended this by jointly 
optimizing multiple concurrent DNN tasks, enabling co-scheduling of 
heterogeneous workloads. Yet, under resource-constrained edge con-
ditions, performance degrades as user numbers increase. This scala-
bility limitation is common across mainstream DNN partitioning tech-
niques [14,15,17,19]. Early-exit mechanisms, surveyed by Haseena 
et al. [17], partially alleviate edge load but cannot ensure real-time
Computer Networks 278 (2026) 112073 
2 
J. Fang et al.
inference under strict resource constraints. Tang et al. [20] proposed 
iterative alternating optimization (IAO) for intelligent partitioning and 
resource allocation, though its high polynomial complexity increases 
decision latency. Similarly, Fan et al. [21] combined DNN partition-
ing with joint communication and computation resource allocation, but 
their nonlinear algorithm incurs substantial overhead.
Overall, existing partitioning-based methods require exhaustive 
layer-wise traversal with time complexity 𝑂(𝑛), where 𝑛 is the number 
of layers. In contrast, our approach reduces partitioning complexity to 
𝑂(1) while raising the computational ceiling for inference performance.
2.2.  Resource optimization and collaborative edge inference
Recent studies leverage machine learning technologies for resource 
allocation across networks, data centers, and edge environments. In net-
work optimization, IADE [22] accelerates convergence in 6G networks, 
SA-MARL [23] combines multi-agent reinforcement learning with sim-
ulated annealing for latency, energy, and load optimization. AFED-
EF [24] adapts VM allocation to handle ﬂuctuating workloads. Edge-
focused solutions include ISC-QL [25] for optimal server placement, 
ECMS [26] for energy prediction, and IECL [27] for real-time power and 
resource estimation. In communication, ANNS [28] addresses IRS-aided 
optimization, SGPL [29] enables secure collaborative communication, 
and RDRL [30] improves dynamic spectrum access in cognitive radio 
networks.
These works demonstrate learning’s potential for system level re-
source management in heterogeneous, dynamic edge systems. However, 
they generally overlook model-level communication bottlenecks and in-
termediate feature transmission in multi-DNN collaborative inference.
2.3.  MoE-based edge inference
Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) architectures have emerged as a key 
paradigm for eﬃcient DNN inference. DeepSeek [31] employs sparse 
gating to activate relevant sub-networks per input, improving eﬃ-
ciency. Recent adaptations target resource-constrained edge environ-
ments. Kong et al. [32] propose PC-MoE, using temporal locality and 
expert exchangeability to maintain a compact “Parameter Committee” 
with minimal accuracy loss. Wang et al. [33] leverage mobile-edge net-
works with DRL-based controllers for selective oﬄoading of MoE sub-
tasks, optimizing communication and computation jointly. Li et al. [34] 
introduce adaptive gating for continual learning in MEC, minimizing 
expert usage while bounding long-term generalization error.
Unlike prior work that treats experts as oﬄoadable units, our Mix-
ture of Adaptive Experts (MAE) framework reconstructs convolutional 
channels into sparsely activated experts, substantially reducing inter-
mediate feature transmission while preserving accuracy. MAE directly 
addresses model-internal communication bottlenecks, enabling eﬃcient 
multi-DNN collaborative inference under limited bandwidth and com-
putation edge constraints.
3.  System modeling and problem formulation
We consider a set  of 𝑛 heterogeneous UEs to perform DNN infer-
ence tasks with the assistance of a resource-constrained ES.
3.1.  Distributed deployment of expert model
DNNs are typically composed of sequentially connected neural lay-
ers, such as convolutional, pooling, and fully-connected layers. These 
layers exhibit strict sequential dependencies the output of each preced-
ing layer serves as input to its successor. This hierarchical organization 
enables partitioning at any inter-layer boundary without altering com-
putational integrity. During DNN inference initiation at a user terminal, 
the UE ﬁrst determines which experts to activate, where each expert cor-
responds to a specialized convolutional channel within the MoE layer. 
Crucially, diﬀerent activation patterns yield distinct expert model by 
combinatorially aggregating selected channels. As illustrated in Fig. 1, 
the expert model is partitioned at the splitting point into a expert header 
model and a expert tail model, which are deployed on the UEs and the 
ES, respectively. Speciﬁcally, Expert Header Model includes all layers 
from input to the partitioned MoE layer (inclusive), executed on UEs.
Expert Tail Model comprises layers subsequent to the partition MoE 
layer (exclusive), executed on ES.
After performing expert header model inference on UEs, interme-
diate feature data is transmitted to ES via wireless networks. ES then 
executes expert tail model inference and returns ﬁnal results to UEs. 
Speciﬁcally, during the process of performing an inference task of type 
𝑘, UE 𝑖 selects expert model 𝑒𝑖
𝑘∈𝑘 and partition point 𝑠𝑖
𝑘∈𝑘 based on 
input characteristics. The header compute load 𝑋(𝑠𝑖
𝑘, 𝑒𝑖
𝑘) consumes lo-
cal resources, intermediate data 𝑀(𝑠𝑖
𝑘, 𝑒𝑖
𝑘) transmits via bandwidth 𝐵𝑖, 
and tail compute load 𝑌(𝑠𝑖
𝑘, 𝑒𝑖
𝑘) executes on ES using allocated Minimum 
Computational Resource Unit (MCRUs) 𝑓𝑖 (yielding processing power 
𝑝𝑖= 𝑓𝑖⋅𝛼). Operating under resource-constrained ES provisioning mul-
tiple heterogeneous DNN inference, the system optimizes to minimize 
the maximum end-to-end latency 𝐷, which aggregates UEs computa-
tion, data transmission, and edge computation delays. We summarize 
the symbols used in the system model in Table 1.
3.2.  DNN inference latency model
The end-to-end latency of DNN inference primarily comprises three 
fundamental components: (a) the execution time of the header model 
on UEs, (b) the transmission latency of intermediate data generated by 
the header model, and (c) the computation time of the tail expert model 
on ES.
Execution Time of the Header Model on UEs (𝑡mob). Let 𝑋(𝑠𝑖
𝑘, 𝑒𝑖
𝑘) denote 
the computational load (FLOPs) for executing the header model of task 
type 𝑘 from the input layer through the partition layer 𝑠𝑖
𝑘 using expert 
model 𝑒𝑖
𝑘. 𝐶𝑖 denotes total computational capacity of UE 𝑖 (FLOPs/s). 
Thus, 𝑡mob is given by 𝑡mob =
𝑋(𝑠𝑖
𝑘,𝑒𝑖
𝑘)
𝐶𝑖
.
Intermediate Data Transmission Latency (𝑡trans). Let 𝑀(𝑠𝑖
𝑘, 𝑒𝑖
𝑘) denote 
the size of the intermediate feature tensor (bits) generated at partition 
layer 𝑠𝑖
𝑘 using expert model 𝑒𝑖
𝑘 for task type 𝑘. The propagation delay 
incurred during intermediate data transfers is explicitly incorporated 
into the temporal model. Let 𝐵𝑖 denote uplink bandwidth allocated to 
UE 𝑖 (bps), 𝑡trans is given by 𝑡trans =
𝑀(𝑠𝑖
𝑘,𝑒𝑖
𝑘)
𝐵𝑖
.
Edge Computation Latency (𝑡edge). Let 𝑌(𝑠𝑖
𝑘, 𝑒𝑖
𝑘) denote the computa-
tional load (in Floating Point Operations, FLOPs) for executing the ex-
pert tail model of task type 𝑘 from the layer immediately following the 
partition layer 𝑠𝑖
𝑘 through the output layer using expert model 𝑒𝑖
𝑘. Let 𝑝𝑖
denote the computational capacity allocated to UE 𝑖 (in FLOPs/s), where 
𝑝𝑖= 𝑓𝑖⋅𝛼. 𝜏down is the result download delay. The edge computation la-
tency is given by:
𝑡edge =
𝑌(𝑠𝑖
𝑘, 𝑒𝑖
𝑘)
𝑝𝑖
⏟⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏟
computation
+ 𝜏down
⏟⏟⏟
download
(1)
The end-to-end latency is formally deﬁned as the additive composi-
tion of these interdependent components:
𝑡(𝑠𝑖
𝑘, 𝑒𝑖
𝑘, 𝑓𝑖) =
𝑋(𝑠𝑖
𝑘, 𝑒𝑖
𝑘)
𝐶𝑖
+
𝑀(𝑠𝑖
𝑘, 𝑒𝑖
𝑘)
𝐵𝑖
+
𝑌(𝑠𝑖
𝑘, 𝑒𝑖
𝑘)
𝑝𝑖
+ 𝜏down
(2)
Notably, latency estimation methods relying solely on theoretical 
computational capacity suﬀer from fundamental limitations particularly 
in batch processing scenarios. Our experimental analysis reveals that the 
memory-bound nature of DNN inference tasks imposes increasingly se-
vere performance constraints as batch sizes grow, with data access bot-
tlenecks limiting achievable performance to merely 23.7% of the theo-
retical FLOPs ceiling. As comprehensively demonstrated in Fig. 2 (via 
Computer Networks 278 (2026) 112073 
3 
J. Fang et al.
Fig. 1. MoE structured Expert Model deployed in a distributed edge-device framework.
Table 1 
System Model Parameters and Deﬁnitions.
 Symbol
 Deﬁnition

 Set of inference task types (e.g., = {AlexNet, VGG16})
||
 Number of distinct task types

 Set of all user equipment (UEs)
||
 Number of UEs
𝑘
 Set of UEs performing task type 𝑘 (𝑘⊆)
𝑛𝑘
 Number of users for task type 𝑘 (𝑛𝑘= |𝑘|)
𝑘
 Set of feasible partitioning points for task 𝑘
𝑠𝑖
𝑘
 Selected partitioning point for task type 𝑘 by UE 𝑖 (𝑠𝑖
𝑘∈𝑘)
𝑘
 Set of expert models for task type 𝑘 (diﬀering in channel count)
𝑒𝑖
𝑘
 Selected expert model for task type 𝑘 by UE 𝑖 (𝑒𝑖
𝑘∈𝑘)
𝑋(𝑠𝑖
𝑘, 𝑒𝑖
𝑘)
 Computation load on UE side for task type 𝑘 at partition 𝑠𝑖
𝑘 with expert model 𝑒𝑖
𝑘 (FLOPs)
𝑌(𝑠𝑖
𝑘, 𝑒𝑖
𝑘)
 Computation load on ES for task type 𝑘 at partition 𝑠𝑖
𝑘 with expert model 𝑒𝑖
𝑘 (FLOPs)
𝑀(𝑠𝑖
𝑘, 𝑒𝑖
𝑘)
 Intermediate data size transmitted for task type 𝑘 at partition 𝑠𝑖
𝑘 with expert 𝑒𝑖
𝑘 (bits)
𝐵𝑖
 Uplink bandwidth allocated to UE 𝑖 (bps)
𝐶𝑖
 Total computational capacity of UE 𝑖 (FLOPs/s)
𝛼
 Minimum Computational Resource Unit (MCRU) size (FLOPs/s)
𝛽
 Total number of available MCRUs (𝛽= ⌊𝐶∕𝛼⌋)
𝑓𝑖
 Number of MCRUs of ES allocated to UE 𝑖 (𝑓𝑖∈ℤ+, ∑𝑓𝑖≤𝛽)
𝑝𝑖
 Computational power of ES allocated to UE 𝑖: 𝑝𝑖= 𝑓𝑖⋅𝛼 (FLOPs/s)
𝐷
 Maximum end-to-end latency across all UEs (s)
𝜖
 Precision tolerance for optimization algorithm
𝐷∗
 Optimized maximum end-to-end latency achieved by Algorithm 1
𝐷opt
 Theoretical optimal maximum end-to-end latency
𝜂
 Containerization overhead factor (𝜂≤1.05)
𝛿mob
𝑘
, 𝛿trans
𝑘
 Measurement errors for UEs computation and transmission time of task type 𝑘
𝜏mob
𝑘
, 𝜏trans
𝑘
, 𝛾𝑘
 Average UEs computation time, transmission time, and edge load for task type 𝑘
Fig. 2. Actual vs. Theoretical Inference Latency Across Diﬀerent Batch Sizes.
benchmarking on an Intel Core i5-9300H testbed), the divergence be-
tween theoretical latency projections and empirical measurements ex-
pands substantially with increasing batch, exposing critical limitations 
of existing analytical models.
Fig. 3. The Error of the proposed Latency Prediction estimation method.
For large-batch operations, persistent discrepancies between the-
ory and practice arise from oversimpliﬁed parallelism assumptions 
and unaccounted for memory contention dynamics. Under small-batch 
Computer Networks 278 (2026) 112073 
4 
J. Fang et al.
regimes, theoretical predictions exhibit signiﬁcant inaccuracies, at-
tributed to unmodeled scheduling overhead and hardware warm-up 
eﬀects. Notably, there is a particularly pronounced inﬂection point 
beyond a batch size of 700, where memory bandwidth saturation 
occurs. These systematic underestimations stem from three primary
factors: ﬁxed framework overheads (30 ms), sublinear scaling of mem-
ory bandwidth utilization, and cache eﬃciency degradation at scale. 
Furthermore, while existing approaches [35] leverage empirical models 
for latency prediction, these methods exhibit strong device dependency 
and lack cross-platform generalizability.
To address these multidimensional prediction inaccuracies, we pro-
pose a simple yet highly eﬀective transferable calibration methodol-
ogy for accurate inference latency prediction of heterogeneous expert 
models in dynamic edge environments. The core of this method lies in 
constructing a real-time monitoring and adaptive data collection mech-
anism tailored to network ﬂuctuations. Speciﬁcally, this mechanism 
continuously monitors key network status parameters (e.g., bandwidth, 
packet loss rate, and delay jitter) at ES. Once network ﬂuctuations across 
consecutive time slots exceed a preset threshold (2%), the UEs automat-
ically triggers an inference request and collects the end-to-end inference 
latency of each expert model under the current network state. After mul-
tiple active probing cycles, an empirical dataset of inference latency for 
heterogeneous expert models under diverse network conditions is sys-
tematically established providing a highly reliable basis for real-time 
inference latency prediction. As observed in Fig. 3, the error between 
the predicted and actual inference latency of expert models does not ex-
ceed 3%, with a mean error of 1.23%, which mean that the proposed 
inference latency prediction method closely aligns with the actual infer-
ence latency of expert models.
3.3.  Problem formulation
Building upon the system model and the latency decomposition, 
we formulate a resource-constrained optimization problem that aims 
to minimize the worst-case end-to-end inference latency among all user 
equipments (UEs). Speciﬁcally, we adopt a min-max objective to ensure 
quality-of-service (QoS) fairness across heterogeneous tasks by minimiz-
ing the maximum latency experienced by any UE in the system. Let 𝐷
denote this maximum end-to-end latency, which is deﬁned as
𝐷=
max
𝑖∈,𝑘∈𝑡(𝑠𝑖
𝑘, 𝑒𝑖
𝑘, 𝑓𝑖)
(3)
The optimization objective is therefore to minimize 𝐷. For each UE 
𝑖∈ executing task type 𝑘∈, we deﬁne three decision dimensions: 
Partition point selection (𝑠𝑖
𝑘∈𝑘), expert model selection (𝑒𝑖
𝑘∈𝑘), and 
Resource allocation (𝑓𝑖∈ℤ+). In addition, the ﬁrst two of these deci-
sions are discrete choices, while the last is an integer-valued allocation 
of MCRUs. Moreover, the end-to-end latency of task type 𝑘 for each UE 
𝑖 must not exceed the maximum latency 𝐷𝛾:
𝑡(𝑠𝑖
𝑘, 𝑒𝑖
𝑘, 𝑓𝑖) ≤𝐷𝛾,
∀𝑖∈, ∀𝑘∈
(4)
The optimization is subject to the following fundamental system con-
straints:
1. Edge resource capacity constraint: The total allocated MCRUs cannot 
exceed server capacity
||
∑
𝑖=1
𝑓𝑖≤𝛽
(5)
2. Integer resource allocation constraint: Resource allocation is quantized 
in MCRU units
𝑓𝑖∈ℤ+,
∀𝑖∈
(6)
3. Partition feasibility constraint: Partition points must be valid for each 
task type
𝑠𝑖
𝑘∈𝑘,
∀𝑖∈𝑘, ∀𝑘∈
(7)
Fig. 4. Analysis of Optimal DNN Partition Point under Low and High Band-
width.
4. Expert model selection constraint: expert models must be compatible 
with task type
𝑒𝑖
𝑘∈𝑘,
∀𝑖∈𝑘, ∀𝑘∈
(8)
Thus, the joint optimization problem for MAE framework is formally 
stated as:
𝐏𝟏∶
min
𝑠𝑖
𝑘, 𝑒𝑖
𝑘, 𝑓𝑖
𝐷
s.t. (5) −(8)
(9)
The formulated problem exhibits three fundamental complexities:
1. Mixed-integer nonlinear programming (MINLP): Combines discrete de-
cisions (𝑠𝑖
𝑘, 𝑒𝑖
𝑘) with integer allocation (𝑓𝑖) and nonlinear latency con-
straints.
2. High-dimensional solution space: The search space cardinality is:
|Ω| =
∏
𝑘∈
(|𝑘| × |𝑘|)𝑛𝑘×
(𝛽+ || −1
|| −1
)
(10)
where the binomial term represents the MCRU allocation combina-
tions.
3. Task-resource coupling: Resource allocations are globally coupled 
through the constraint, while expert and partition selections locally 
aﬀect computational and communication loads.
A key insight underpins an eﬃcient solution: For ﬁxed conﬁgura-
tions of (𝑠𝑖
𝑘, 𝑒𝑖
𝑘), the minimum feasible 𝐷 decreases monotonically as 
𝛽 increases. This monotonicity property provides the theoretical basis 
for our proposed 𝑂(𝑛) solution, detailed in Section 4. While joint opti-
mization across multiple resource dimensions introduces combinatorial 
complexity, the core monotonicity principle established herein oﬀers a 
scalable theoretical foundation for future integrated resource manage-
ment schemes. This focus is further validated by the operational reality 
of edge systems: the reconﬁguration timescales of non-computational 
resources are typically orders of magnitude slower than those of com-
putational resource allocation.
Computer Networks 278 (2026) 112073 
5 
J. Fang et al.
Fig. 5. Inference Latency Comparison Across Diﬀerent Partitioning Strategies for Heterogeneous DNNs and Their Expert Model (EM).
4.  The mae framework: an o(k)-complexity optimization 
algorithm
4.1.  Core architectural innovations
The MAE framework revolutionizes edge-device collaborative infer-
ence through two fundamental innovations that collectively achieve 
𝑂(𝑘) time complexity:
1. Fixed Optimal Partition Point: The computationally intensive por-
tions of a DNN are typically executed on an ES. To empirically vali-
date the optimal partition point of expert networks, an extensive set 
of experiments was conducted. We ﬁrst examined the optimal partition 
point of VGG16 under conditions of suﬃcient ES resources and vary-
ing bandwidth. As illustrated in Fig. 4, positioning the partition point 
immediately after the ﬁrst convolutional layer consistently yields the 
minimum end-to-end latency across all bandwidth scenarios. Empirical 
results show that this partitioning strategy reduces latency by a factor of 
between 8× (at 100 Mbps) and 21.6× (at 5 Mbps) relative to input-layer 
partitioning. Crucially, under conditions of suﬃcient ES resources, this 
optimal partition point remains invariant to ﬂuctuations in bandwidth.
In addition, experiments were conducted on four classical hetero-
geneous deep neural network (DNN) architectures and their respective 
expert models under the conditions of ﬁxed bandwidth and constrained 
resources. As illustrated in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6, the optimal partition points 
diﬀer across traditional DNN models. Speciﬁcally, AlexNet’s optimal 
partition lies at the L2 layer, while VGG16, ResNet18, and Inception-
Net exhibit their optimal partition points at L0 (i.e., full oﬄoading is 
implemented), and MobileNet’s optimal partition is found at the L10 
layer.
Furthermore, the L1 layer in traditional DNN models is typically 
conﬁgured as a convolutional layer with a substantial number of con-
volutional channels. A greater number of convolutional channels leads 
to a larger volume of intermediate feature data in the output, accom-
panied by increased redundant data. Consequently, under the premise 
of preserving inference accuracy, it becomes feasible to reduce redun-
dant features by activating only a subset of channels in the L1 layer 
thereby improving overall inference latency. As depicted in Figs. 5 and 
6, when the expert model architecture is applied to the L1 layer (with 
only partial convolutional channels activated while ensuring inference 
accuracy), the minimal overall inference latency can only be achieved by 
partitioning the model after the L1 layer. Additionally, as presented in 
Table 2, after integrating the expert model architecture into the L1 layer 
of traditional DNN models, both transmission latency and overall infer-
ence latency exhibit a signiﬁcant reduction. For this reason, during the 
optimal partition point selection process, MAE empirically ﬁxes the L1 
layer as the optimal partition point and deploys the expert model archi-
tecture accordingly. Formally, for any task type 𝑘∈, 𝑠∗
𝑘= post-conv1, 
which eliminates the 𝑂(𝐿) layer traversal complexity.
2. Channel-constrained Expert Model Selection: For each task type 𝑘, 
MAE aims to select an expert model 𝑒𝑖
𝑘∈𝑘 that minimizes the num-
ber of activated convolutional channels while maintaining the inference
accuracy of the original DNN:
𝐏∶
min (𝑒𝑖
𝑘)
s.t.
Accuracy(𝑒𝑖
𝑘) ≥Accuracy(original model)
(11)
where (𝑒𝑖
𝑘) denotes the number of activated convolutional chan-
nels in expert model 𝑒𝑖
𝑘 and Accuracy(⋅) represents its inference accuracy 
on the target task. Given the variations in convolutional channels acti-
vated by diﬀerent expert models, the extent of inference accuracy degra-
dation resulting from these diﬀerences remains unclear. Consequently, 
eﬃcient selection of expert models cannot be performed during online 
inference. To address this challenge, MAE adopts an oﬄine proﬁling 
strategy that decouples expert model construction from online inference. 
Speciﬁcally, MAE enumerates candidate expert models oﬄine, proﬁles 
their channel activation patterns, and accuracy performance, and stores 
the resulting mappings in a lookup table. This design enables eﬃcient 
expert selection at runtime with negligible overhead while preserving 
accuracy guaranties.
The oﬄine procedure begins by constructing the expert space 
through a binary search over the channel count 𝑐 of a designated con-
volutional layer in the target DNN, where 𝑐∈[𝑐min, 𝑐max]. Here, 𝑐min rep-
resents a small fraction of the original channel width, and 𝑐max corre-
sponds to the full model. This process eﬃciently explores the feasible 
sparsity range and yields a compact yet representative expert set 𝑘, in 
which each expert model is characterized by a distinct sparse channel 
activation conﬁguration. Each candidate expert in 𝑘 is then ﬁne-tuned 
from the same pre-trained baseline using the task-speciﬁc dataset (e.g., 
CIFAR-10). The training settings of the model and the corresponding 
expert model are consistent with those in the evaluation section.
The oﬄine training process constitutes a one-time preprocessing cost 
for each target DNN. Its computational overhead scales linearly with the 
number of candidate expert models generated through the binary search 
procedure. Even for models with relatively large parameter sizes, such 
as ResNet-18 evaluated in this work, the entire oﬄine training and pro-
ﬁling process can be completed within a few hours using mainstream 
GPU accelerators. Given the long operational lifetime of edge inference
Computer Networks 278 (2026) 112073 
6 
J. Fang et al.
Fig. 6. Inference Latency Comparison Across Diﬀerent Partitioning Strategies 
for MobileNet and Expert Model (EM).
Table 2 
A comparative analysis of optimal inference latency be-
tween the original model and expert model.
 Model
 Latency
 UE
 Transfer
 ES
 Total
 AlexNet
 31.5
 67.0
 2.8
 101.3
 AlexNet EM
 17.6
 8.7
 2.5
 28.8
 VGG16
 0.0
 216.2
 35.7
 251.9
 VGG16 EM
 5.7
 72.1
 32.2
 110.0
 ResNet18
 0.0
 216.2
 58.3
 274.5
 ResNet18 EM
 6.8
 144.1
 59.6
 210.5
 InceptionNet
 120.2
 216.2
 16.8
 353.2
 InceptionNet EM
 19.5
 72.1
 18.2
 108.7
 MobileNet
 353.0
 0.0
 0.0
 353.0
 MobileNet EM
 2.4
 330.9
 3.7
 337.0
systems, this one-time overhead is negligible and can be eﬀectively 
amortized over a large volume of inference requests, resulting in mini-
mal impact on overall system eﬃciency.
4.2.  Algorithmic transformation
The original problem 𝐏𝟏 is transformed into a tractable optimization 
problem and can be addressed by the following two steps:
Step 1: Precomputation of Task-type Parameters. Based on Sec-
tion 4.1, for each task type 𝑘∈, the optimal partition point is ﬁxed 
(i.e., 𝑠𝑘= post-conv1) and the expert model 𝑒𝑘 is determined through 
quickly searching the lookup table. Thus, MAE computes the following 
parameters:
𝜏mob
𝑘
= 1
𝑛𝑘
∑
𝑖∈𝑘
𝑋(𝑠𝑖
𝑘, 𝑒𝑖
𝑘)
𝐶𝑖
(12)
𝜏trans
𝑘
= 1
𝑛𝑘
∑
𝑖∈𝑘
𝑀(𝑠𝑖
𝑘, 𝑒𝑖
𝑘)
𝐵𝑖
(13)
𝛾𝑘= 𝑌(𝑠𝑖
𝑘, 𝑒𝑖
𝑘)
(14)
Step 2: Resource Allocation Formulation. The optimization problem 
reduces to allocating MCRUs {𝑓𝑘} to task types 𝑘:
𝐏𝟐∶min 𝐷
(15a)
s.t. 𝜏mob
𝑘
+ 𝜏trans
𝑘
+
𝛾𝑘
𝑓𝑘⋅𝛼≤𝐷𝛾
(15b)
∑
𝑘∈
𝑛𝑘𝑓𝑘≤𝛽
(15c)
𝑓𝑘∈ℤ+, ∀𝑘∈
(15d)
Note that 𝑓𝑘⋅𝛼 represents the processing power allocated per task 
of type 𝑘.
The proposed MAE resource allocation algorithm is shown in Algo-
rithm 1. Initially, the lower bound 𝐷low is set to 0, and the upper bound 
𝐷high is set to the maximum possible latency incurred when each task 
is allocated only one MCRU (Line 1–2). The bisection search then itera-
tively tightens these bounds (Line 3–15). In each iteration, a candidate 
Table 3 
Time Complexity Breakdown.
 Phase
 Traditional
 MAE
 Partitioning
𝑂(𝐿) per task
𝑂(1)
 Expert Selection
𝑂(||) per task
𝑂(1)
 Resource Allocation
𝑂(𝑁2) or higher
𝑂(|| log 1
𝜖)
 Total
𝑂(𝑁𝐿+ 𝑁|| + 𝑁2)
𝑂(|| log 1
𝜖)
mid-value 𝐷mid is tested for feasibility. For each task type 𝑘, the min-
imum number of MCRUs 𝑓min
𝑘 required to meet the latency constraint 
𝐷mid is computed (Line 7). The total MCRUs required across all task 
types, 𝛽req = ∑
𝑘∈𝑛𝑘⋅𝑓min
𝑘
, is then summed. If 𝛽req does not exceed the 
total available MCRUs 𝛽, 𝐷mid is feasible, and the upper bound 𝐷high is 
reduced. Otherwise, the lower bound 𝐷low is increased (Line 13). The 
loop terminates when the search interval is smaller than a predeﬁned 
tolerance 𝜖, ensuring 𝜖-optimality. Finally, the optimal allocation 𝑓𝑘 for 
each task type is derived using the converged value 𝐷∗. This algorithm 
eﬃciently converges to the optimal solution with a time complexity of 
𝑂(|| log(1∕𝜖)), making it highly scalable for edge environments with 
limited task-type varieties.
4.3.  Complexity analysis
The MAE framework achieves unprecedented eﬃciency through al-
gorithmic stratiﬁcation. As shown in Table 3, || is bounded (e.g., 5–10 
task types in real systems) and independent of 𝑁. Therefore, the overall 
complexity reduces to 𝑂(log 1
𝜖), eﬀectively 𝑂(1) for practical purposes. 
For increasing 𝑁 with ﬁxed ||, complexity remains constant.
In Table 3, we deﬁne the following notation: 𝐿 denotes the number 
of potential partition points, || represents the count of expert models, 
and || stands for the number of distinct task types (where || ≪). 
Additionally, 𝜖 denotes the precision tolerance, which is typically set to 
10−3.
Algorithm 1 MAE Resource Allocation.
Require: Task types , counts {𝑛𝑘}, parameters {𝜏mob
𝑘
, 𝜏trans
𝑘
, 𝛾𝑘}, total 
MCRUs 𝛽
Ensure: Resource allocation {𝑓𝑘}, min-max latency 𝐷∗
1: 𝐷low ←0
⊳ Lower bound
2: 𝐷high ←max
𝑘
(
𝜏mob
𝑘
+ 𝜏trans
𝑘
+ 𝛾𝑘
𝛼
)
⊳ Upper bound
3: while 𝐷high −𝐷low > 𝜖 do
4:  
𝐷mid ←(𝐷low + 𝐷high)∕2
5:  
𝛽req ←0
⊳ Total MCRUs required for 𝐷mid
6:  
for each task type 𝑘∈ do
7:  
𝑓min
𝑘
←
⌈
𝛾𝑘
𝛼(𝐷mid−𝜏mob
𝑘
−𝜏trans
𝑘
)
⌉
8:  
𝑝𝑘←𝑓min
𝑘
⋅𝛼
⊳ Required processing power
9:  
end for
10:  
if 𝛽req ≤𝛽 then
11:  
𝐷high ←𝐷mid
⊳ Feasible latency
12:  
else
13:  
𝐷low ←𝐷mid
⊳ Infeasible latency
14:  
end if
15: end while
16: 𝐷∗←𝐷high
17: Compute {𝑓𝑘} using 𝐷∗ (Line 7)
4.4.  Optimality guarantee
This subsection presents rigorous proofs establishing the conver-
gence and bounded-error properties of the proposed algorithm.
Computer Networks 278 (2026) 112073 
7 
J. Fang et al.
Lemma 1 (Upper Bound Initialization Validity). For any resource al-
location scheme satisfying ∑
𝑖𝑓𝑖≤𝛽, the maximum latency 𝐷 is bounded 
by:
𝐷≤max
𝑘∈
(
𝜏mob
𝑘
+ 𝜏trans
𝑘
+ 𝛾𝑘
𝛼
)
≜𝐷max
(16)
Proof. Consider the minimal resource allocation where each task re-
ceives exactly one MCRU (𝑓𝑘= 1). The edge computation latency for 
task type 𝑘 satisﬁes:
𝑡edge
𝑘
=
𝛾𝑘
𝑓𝑘⋅𝛼≤𝛾𝑘
𝛼
(17)
since 𝑓𝑘≥1. Therefore, by combining this with the UEs computation 
and intermediate feature transmission latencies, we have:
𝑡𝑘≤𝜏mob
𝑘
+ 𝜏trans
𝑘
+ 𝛾𝑘
𝛼
≤max
𝑘∈
(
𝜏mob
𝑘
+ 𝜏trans
𝑘
+ 𝛾𝑘
𝛼
)
= 𝐷max
(18)
Thus 𝐷= max (𝑡𝑘
) ≤𝐷max for any feasible allocation. ∎
Theorem 1 (𝜖-Optimality). Given a precision tolerance 𝜖> 0, Algorithm 
1 outputs a minimal maximum end-to-end latency 𝐷∗ such that:
|𝐷∗−𝐷opt| ≤𝜖
(19)
where 𝐷opt denotes the true minimal maximum end-to-end latency, with time 
complexity:

(
|| log2
(𝐷max −𝐷min
𝜖
))
(20)
Theorem 2.  Let 𝐹(𝐷) denote the feasibility function, which returns 1 if 
the latency constraint 𝐷 can be satisﬁed with the available MCRUs 𝛽, and 0 
otherwise. We establish convergence via three properties: 1. Monotonicity: 
The feasibility function (𝐷) is monotonically non-increasing in 𝐷. For any 
𝐷1 < 𝐷2:
(𝐷1) = 1 ⇒(𝐷2) = 1
(21)
since reduced latency constraints relax the optimization problem.
2. Bounded Search Space: By Lemma 1, 𝐷0
high = 𝐷max is a valid upper 
bound. The lower bound 𝐷0
low = 0 is trivial since 𝑡𝑘> 0.
3. Linear Convergence: Each bisection step halves the search interval:
Δ(𝑛) =
𝐷0
high −𝐷0
low
2𝑛
(22)
where Δ(𝑛) denotes the search interval length after 𝑛 iterations. Termination 
occurs when Δ(𝑛) ≤𝜖, requiring at most 𝑛max =
⌈
log2
( 𝐷max−0
𝜖
)⌉
 iterations.
At termination, 𝐷∗= 𝐷high satisﬁes 𝐷opt ≤𝐷∗≤𝐷opt + 𝜖 since 𝐷∗ is 
feasible ((𝐷∗) = 1) and 𝐷∗−𝜖∕2 was infeasible in the previous iteration. 
The per-iteration cost is (||) from the resource requirement computation. 
Thus, the total complexity is (|| log2(𝐷max∕𝜖)).
Theorem 3 (Deployment Error Bound). The practical deployment latency 
̂𝐷 exceeds the predicted optimal latency 𝐷∗ by at most:
̂𝐷−𝐷∗≤max
𝑘∈
(
𝛿mob
𝑘
+ 𝛿trans
𝑘
+ 𝛾𝑘(𝜂−1)
𝛼
)
(23)
where:
• 𝛿mob
𝑘
 is the upper bound for UEs computation time measurement error,
• 𝛿trans
𝑘
 is the upper bound for transmission time estimation error, and
• 𝜂≥1 is the containerization overhead factor (empirically 𝜂≤1.05).
Proof. Let ̂𝑡𝑘 denote actual latency for task type 𝑘:
̂𝑡𝑘= (𝜏mob
𝑘
+ Δ𝜏mob
𝑘
)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
actual UEs
+ (𝜏trans
𝑘
+ Δ𝜏trans
𝑘
)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
actual trans
+
𝛾𝑘
𝑝_𝑘∕𝜂
≤(𝜏mob
𝑘
+ 𝛿mob
𝑘
) + (𝜏trans
𝑘
+ 𝛿trans
𝑘
) + 𝛾𝑘𝜂
𝑓𝑘𝛼
(24)
Since 𝑓𝑘 satisﬁes the constraint at 𝐷∗:
𝜏mob
𝑘
+ 𝜏trans
𝑘
+ 𝛾𝑘
𝑓𝑘𝛼≤𝐷∗
(25)
Combining inequalities:
̂𝑡𝑘≤𝐷∗+ 𝛿mob
𝑘
+ 𝛿trans
𝑘
+ 𝛾𝑘(𝜂−1)
𝑓𝑘𝛼
(26)
Using 𝑓𝑘≥1 and 𝛾𝑘∕(𝑓𝑘𝛼) ≤𝐷∗≤𝐷max:
̂𝐷= max
𝑘
̂𝑡𝑘≤𝐷∗+ max
𝑘
(
𝛿mob
𝑘
+ 𝛿trans
𝑘
+ 𝛾𝑘(𝜂−1)
𝛼
)
(27)
Empirical measurements show 𝛿mob
𝑘
, 𝛿trans
𝑘
< 1 ms and 𝜂= 1.05 for Docker 
containers. ∎
5.  Experimental evaluation
5.1.  Experimental setup
5.1.1.  Hardware conﬁguration
To evaluate system performance under realistic conditions, we de-
ployed a heterogeneous edge computing testbed comprising a central 
ES and multiple user terminals. ES is equipped with an NVIDIA GeForce 
GTX 1660 Ti GPU as the primary accelerator for convolutional work-
loads, along with dual Intel Xeon Silver 4314 processors and 256 GB 
of RAM to support concurrent processing. Each user terminal provides 
local computational capability through a CPU with 16 GB of RAM and 
emulated 4G/5G cellular connectivity, simulating real-world network 
conditions. At the server side, we leverage Docker containers to iso-
late computational resources for each user device. To faithfully emulate 
the resource-constrained edge computing scenarios central to our study, 
we conﬁgured the ES with a deliberately limited pool of computational 
resources, quantiﬁed as MCRUs as deﬁned in our system model (Sec-
tion 3). The total number of available MCRUs was set to 𝛽 = 200, with 
each MCRU delivering 𝛼 = 50 GFLOPS/s. This setting is designed to cre-
ate resource contention under the baseline workload of 6 AlexNet and 
6 VGG16 tasks.
5.1.2.  Software & workloads
For our experimental evaluation, we employed PyTorch 1.12 with 
CUDA 11.6 as the deep learning framework to leverage GPU accel-
eration capabilities. The benchmark workloads utilized the CIFAR-10 
dataset [18] comprising 60,000 32 × 32 RGB images across 10 object 
classes. To represent diverse edge inference scenarios, six instances of 
AlexNet were deployed as lightweight models (approximately 61 million 
FLOPs per instance) alongside six instances of VGG-16 as computation-
ally intensive models (approximately 15.5 billion FLOPs per instance) 
across diﬀerent UEs. To ensure fair comparison and isolate the impact 
of channel sparsity, all baseline models and their corresponding expert 
models were trained using identical hyperparameters: SGD with a mo-
mentum of 0.9, weight decay of 5 × 10−4, and a step-wise learning rate 
decay applied at 50% and 75% of the total training epochs. AlexNet and 
VGG-16 architectures were trained with an initial learning rate of 0.01 
and 0.05, and a batch size of 128 and 64. The accuracy of all models 
was evaluated on a pre-deﬁned test set, which comprised a randomly 
selected 20% subset of the CIFAR-10 dataset, partitioned prior to the 
commencement of training.
5.1.3.  Comparison methods
We evaluated the proposed MAE framework against the following 
four baseline strategies: (1) Local Execution, where inference tasks are 
executed entirely on UEs without oﬄoading to the ES. This strategy 
does not involve resource allocation on the ES and relies solely on the 
terminal’s own computational capability. (2) Full Oﬄoading refers to 
the approach where UEs transmit complete inference tasks to the ES 
for execution. Under this strategy, multiple terminals compete for lim-
ited edge computing resources and newly arrived tasks must wait un-
til ongoing tasks ﬁnish and resources are released if allocation is full. 
Computer Networks 278 (2026) 112073 
8 
J. Fang et al.
Fig. 7. Comparison of diﬀerent strategies under low-bandwidth scenarios 
(5 Mbps).
Fig. 8. Comparison of diﬀerent strategies under high-bandwidth scenarios.
(3) Uniform Allocation [19,36], which ﬁrst traverses all layers of the 
model to determine the optimal partition point by comparing end-to-
end inference latency across diﬀerent partition locations. All tasks are 
oﬄoaded according to this optimal partition point and are allocated an 
equal amount of computational resources on the ES. (4) IAO (Iterative 
Alternating Optimization) [20], which jointly determines the optimal 
partition point and performs dynamic resource allocation based on an 
iterative alternating optimization method, with the goal of minimizing 
overall inference latency. These baseline methods provide representa-
tive references for device-edge collaborative inference from diﬀerent 
perspectives.
5.2.  MAE eﬃcacy under diverse bandwidth
We conducted extensive experiments across diverse bandwidth con-
ditions to validate MAE eﬃcacy. As shown in Figs. 7 and 8, our frame-
work consistently outperforms all baselines in both high and low-
bandwidth conditions. Speciﬁcally, under constrained 5 Mbps network 
conditions (Fig. 7), MAE achieves a latency reduction of 35% compared 
to local execution and a 61% performance improvement over full of-
ﬂoading. This superiority originates from the adopted expert model se-
lection, which reduces the transmission volume by a factor of 4.8 rela-
tive to conventional oﬄoading approaches. As the bandwidth increases 
to 100 Mbps, MAE retains a 19% performance advantage over IAO. This 
is accomplished by dynamically adjusting resource allocation strategies 
to minimize computational bottlenecks.
As shown in Fig. 8, the proposed MAE framework consistently out-
performs all baseline methods under high-bandwidth conditions. More 
notably, it exhibits even more signiﬁcant advantages in lower band-
width scenarios. Speciﬁcally, at a bandwidth of 20 Mbps, MAE achieves 
a 33.5% reduction in latency compared to IAO (the best-performing 
baseline algorithm). This improvement can be attributed to the adop-
tion of the expert model selection, which substantially reduces the vol-
ume of intermediate data during collaborative DNN inference, thereby 
signiﬁcantly reducing the end-to-end inference latency.
Fig. 9. Scalability analysis with increasing AlexNet tasks.
Fig. 10. Performance under resource constraints.
5.3.  Scalability analysis under heterogeneous workloads
To rigorously evaluate the scalability of MAE under heterogeneous 
task distributions, we designed and conducted two complementary ex-
periments under ﬁxed bandwidth (100 Mbps)). These experiments col-
lectively validate MAE’s robustness against both workload scaling and 
resource constraints, providing comprehensive evidence of its adaptive 
performance in dynamic environments.
Fig. 9 presents latency measurements obtained under a scenario 
where the number of AlexNet tasks increases from 5 to 50, while the 
number of VGG16 tasks is maintained at 10. The experimental data 
reveals several critical insights: Compared to IAO, the proposed MAE 
framework demonstrates consistent superiority as the task scale ex-
pands. When the total number of tasks grows tenfold, the DNN inference 
latency of MAE increases from 72.5 ms to 207.2 ms; notably, this trans-
lates to an average performance improvement of 13% over IAO. The 
logarithmic scaling enables MAE to maintain stable performance under 
heavy loads.
Fig. 10 presents system performance evaluations under severe edge 
resource constraints, where edge resources are reduced from 200 to 
20 MCRUs. Critical ﬁndings contain (1)Graceful degradation: MAE ex-
hibits superior robustness, as its latency increases by merely 316% (from 
0.75 ms to 2.37 ms) when edge resources are reduced by 90%. This per-
formance signiﬁcantly outperforms that of Full Oﬄoad (1000% latency 
increase), Uniform Allocation (947% latency increase), and IAO (1000% 
latency increase). (2) Critical threshold behavior: When edge resources 
drop below 40 MCRUs (20% of the initial resource amount), MAE’s ad-
vantage is further ampliﬁed at 40 MCRUs. At this level, it achieves 6.5×
lower latency than IAO (1.63 ms for MAE vs. 10.6 ms for IAO) and 
138× lower latency than Full Oﬄoad (1.63 ms for MAE vs. 225 ms for 
Full Oﬄoad). (3) Resource-eﬃcient design: MAE maintains a sub-2.5 ms 
Computer Networks 278 (2026) 112073 
9 
J. Fang et al.
Fig. 11. Energy consumption under High and Low Bandwidth.
Fig. 12. Scalability analysis with increasing AlexNet tasks for energy compari-
son.
end-to-end latency even at 20 MCRUs. This is attributed to its minimal 
overhead of expert selection and optimal partitioning strategy, which 
reduce resource demands by a factor of 4.8 compared to conventional 
oﬄoading approaches.
5.4.  Energy consumption
The energy consumption of an inference task comprises three compo-
nents: UEs computation energy, transmission energy, and edge compu-
tation energy. UEs computation energy is deﬁned as the product of the 
UE’s average power during DNN execution and its local inference time. 
Transmission energy equals the UE’s transmission power multiplied by 
the duration of intermediate feature transmission. Edge computation en-
ergy scales linearly with the allocated computational resources (MCRUs) 
and the server’s power consumption. The total task energy is the sum 
of these components. In multi-task scenarios, system-wide energy con-
sumption is obtained by aggregating energy usage across all UEs.
Fig. 11 illustrates the total energy consumption corresponding for 
each type of DNN models under high-bandwidth (100 Mbps) and low-
bandwidth (5 Mbps) settings. Overall, the expert models in the MAE 
framework consistently achieve substantial energy savings. Under high-
bandwidth condition, reduced transmission latency diminishes the im-
pact of transmission energy. Even so, by activating only a sparse subset 
of convolutional channels, expert models signiﬁcantly decrease inter-
mediate feature sizes, improving both UEs and edge computation ef-
ﬁciency. Compared with their baseline models, expert models achieve 
energy reductions ranging from 4.0% (ResNet18 EM) to 73.3% (Mo-
bileNet EM). In low-bandwidth scenario, transmission energy domi-
nates due to extended data transfer time. Here, the beneﬁts of EMs 
become more pronounced: aggressive feature compression leads to en-
ergy savings between 28.6% (ResNet18 EM) and 82.0% (AlexNet EM). 
These results conﬁrm that the MAE framework delivers superior en-
ergy eﬃciency, particularly in bandwidth-constrained edge inference
environments.
A notable exception arises for MobileNet. Under low-bandwidth con-
dition, the expert model (MobileNet EM) consumes approximately 272% 
more energy than executing the original MobileNet entirely on the mo-
bile device. This counterintuitive behavior can be attributed to two fac-
tors. First, in bandwidth-constrained environments, collaborative infer-
ence incurs substantial transmission overhead for intermediate features. 
Second, MobileNet is an lightweight model with inherently low local 
computation energy. Consequently, for such model, purely local execu-
tion is more energy-eﬃcient than collaborative inference under limited 
bandwidth.
To further investigate the energy consumption characteristics of 
MAE in scalable heterogeneous task scenarios, we conducted dedicated 
experiments under a ﬁxed bandwidth condition of 100 Mbps. Fig. 12 
further demonstrates that the MAE framework consistently achieves the 
lowest total energy consumption across all task conﬁgurations. As the 
number of AlexNet inference tasks increases from 10 to 100, MAE ex-
hibits a logarithmic growth trend, with total energy rising from 509 mJ 
to 1209 mJ. Compared with uniform partitioning, MAE reduces energy 
consumption by 53.5%, and achieves orders-of-magnitude savings rela-
tive to full oﬄoading and fully local execution.
6.  Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a novel Mixture of Adaptive Experts (MAE) 
framework to address the eﬃciency bottleneck of DNN inference in het-
erogeneous MEC environments. By reconﬁguring convolutional chan-
nels into specialized "experts" that are sparsely activated during each 
inference process, MAE eﬀectively reduces the transmission overhead of 
intermediate features while preserving model accuracy. This approach 
enables eﬃcient model partitioning and subsequent selection of expert 
models. Moreover, MAE reformulates the computationally intractable 
resource scheduling problem into an optimization problem character-
ized by a monotonically decreasing objective function. To solve this 
problem, we develop the MAE Resource Allocation algorithm, which is 
capable of identifying the optimal solution with logarithmic time com-
plexity. To evaluate the performance of the MAE framework, we con-
duct extensive experiments on real-world heterogeneous DNN tasks. The 
results demonstrate that our solution signiﬁcantly improves overall sys-
tem performance in terms of inference eﬃciency while maintaining in-
ference accuracy, conﬁrming its practical eﬀectiveness and eﬃciency in 
edge computing scenarios.
The current MAE framework is based on convolutional channel 
reconstruction, treating individual channels as specialized experts. 
While eﬀective for CNNs, this design limits direct applicability to non-
convolutional architectures such as Vision Transformers, which rely 
on self-attention rather than channel-wise representations. Future work 
will extend MAE to a broader range of DNN architectures, including 
federated learning settings, and explore more general expert-activation 
mechanisms compatible with diverse network backbones. We also plan 
to evaluate MAE on additional vision tasks beyond classiﬁcation, such 
as semantic segmentation. We also plan to incorporate energy-aware 
scheduling for battery-constrained IoT deployments.
Computer Networks 278 (2026) 112073 
10 
J. Fang et al.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Juan Fang: Writing – original draft, Supervision, Methodology;
Yaxin An: Investigation, Software, Validation, Methodology; Yaqi Liu:
Writing – original draft, Validation, Methodology; Ziyi Teng: Soft-
ware, Validation, Visualization; Xiaoning Zhai: Software, Data cura-
tion; Heng Tang: Software, Validation; Huijie Chen: Project adminis-
tration, Funding acquisition, Writing – original draft, Methodology.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Acknowledgment
This work is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of 
China (62202019, 61202076), and supported by the Beijing Municipal 
Natural Science Foundation under Grant 4262021, along with other gov-
ernment sponsors. Corresponding author is Huijie Chen. 
References
[1] Y. Hu, Q. Jia, Y. Yao, Y. Lee, M. Lee, C. Wang, X. Zhou, R. Xie, F.R. Yu, Industrial 
internet of things intelligence empowering smart manufacturing: a literature review, 
IEEE Internet Things J. 11 (11) (2024) 19143–19167.
[2] T. Gong, L. Zhu, F.R. Yu, T. Tang, Edge intelligence in intelligent transportation 
systems: a survey, IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 24 (9) (2023) 8919–8944.
[3] C. Chen, C. Wang, B. Liu, C. He, L. Cong, S. Wan, Edge intelligence empowered 
vehicle detection and image segmentation for autonomous vehicles, IEEE Trans. 
Intell. Transp. Syst. 24 (11) (2023) 13023–13034.
[4] H. Hua, Y. Li, T. Wang, N. Dong, W. Li, J. Cao, Edge computing with artiﬁcial intel-
ligence: a machine learning perspective, ACM Comput. Surv. 55 (9) (2023) 1–35.
[5] J. Fang, D. Qu, H. Chen, Y. Liu, Dependency-aware dynamic task oﬄoading based 
on deep reinforcement learning in mobile-edge computing, IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. 
Manage. 21 (2) (2023) 1403–1415.
[6] J.H. Syu, J.C.W. Lin, G. Srivastava, K. Yu, A comprehensive survey on artiﬁcial intel-
ligence empowered edge computing on consumer electronics, IEEE Trans. Consum. 
Electron. 69 (4) (2023) 1023–1034.
[7] S. Zhang, N. Yi, Y. Ma, A survey of computation oﬄoading with task types, IEEE 
Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 25 (8) (2024) 8313–8333.
[8] A. Younis, S. Maheshwari, D. Pompili, Energy-latency computation oﬄoading and 
approximate computing in mobile-edge computing networks, IEEE Trans. Netw. 
Serv. Manage. 21 (3) (2024) 3401–3415.
[9] H. Cheng, M. Zhang, J.Q. Shi, A survey on deep neural network pruning: taxonomy, 
comparison, analysis, and recommendations, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 
46 (12) (2024) 10558–10578.
[10] B.J. Eccles, P. Rodgers, P. Kilpatrick, I. Spence, B. Varghese, DNNShifter: An eﬃcient 
DNN pruning system for edge computing, Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 152 (2024) 
43–54.
[11] M. Sepahvand, F. Abdali-Mohammadi, A. Taherkordi, An adaptive teacher-student 
learning algorithm with decomposed knowledge distillation for on-edge intelligence, 
Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 117 (2023) 105560.
[12] Y. Kang, J. Hauswald, C. Gao, et al, Neurosurgeon: collaborative intelligence be-
tween the cloud and mobile edge, ACM SIGARCH Computer Architecture News 45 
(1) (2017) 615–629.
[13] Y. Duan, J. Wu, Optimizing job oﬄoading schedule for collaborative DNN inference, 
IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput. 23 (4) (2023) 3436–3451.
[14] S.K. Ghosh, A. Raha, V. Raghunathan, A. Raghunathan, Partnner: platform-agnostic 
adaptive edge-cloud DNN partitioning for minimizing end-to-end latency, ACM 
Trans. Embedded Comput. Syst. 23 (1) (2024) 1–38.
[15] H. Li, X. Li, Q. Fan, Q. He, X. Wang, V.C.M. Leung, Distributed DNN inference with 
ﬁne-grained model partitioning in mobile edge computing networks, IEEE Trans. 
Mob. Comput. 23 (10) (2024) 9060–9074.
[16] P. Dai, B. Han, K. Li, X. Xu, H. Xing, K. Liu, Joint optimization of device place-
ment and model partitioning for cooperative DNN inference in heterogeneous edge 
computing, IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput. 24 (1) (2024) 210–226.
[17] R.P. H, V. Srivastava, K. Chaurasia, R.G. Pacheco, R.S. Couto, Early-exit deep neural 
network-a comprehensive survey, ACM Comput. Surv. 57 (3) (2024) 1–37.
[18] D. Bankman, L. Yang, B. Moons, M. Verhelst, B. Murmann, An always-on 3.8𝜇 j/86bi-
nary cnn processor with all memory on chip in 28-nm cmos, IEEE J. Solid State 
Circuits 54 (1) (2018) 158–172.
[19] Q. Wu, W. Wang, P. Fan, Q. Fan, J. Wang, K.B. Letaief, Urllc-awared resource allo-
cation for heterogeneous vehicular edge computing, IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 73 
(8) (2024) 11789–11805.
[20] X. Tang, X. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Yu, L. Chen, Joint multiuser DNN partitioning and 
computational resource allocation for collaborative edge intelligence, IEEE Internet 
Things J. 8 (12) (2021) 9511–9522.
[21] W. Fan, L. Gao, Y. Su, F. Wu, Y. Liu, Joint DNN partition and resource allocation for 
task oﬄoading in edge-cloud-assisted iot environments, IEEE Internet Things J. 10 
(12) (2023) 10146–10159.
[22] Z. Zhou, M. Shojafar, J. Abawajy, A.K. Bashir, IADE: An improved diﬀerential evo-
lution algorithm to preserve sustainability in a 6g network, IEEE Transactions on 
Green Communications and Networking 5 (4) (2021) 1747–1760.
[23] C. Li, Y. Su, Z. Zhou, Z. Zhao, Y. Wen, J. Chen, J. Wei, Multiagent reinforcement 
learning-based cost-eﬃcient edge server deployment in CPSS, 2025, pp. 1–13.
[24] Z. Zhou, M. Shojafar, M. Alazab, J. Abawajy, F. Li, AFED-EF: An energy-eﬃcient vm 
allocation algorithm for iot applications in a cloud data center, IEEE Transactions 
on Green Communications and Networking 5 (2) (2021) 658–669.
[25] Z. Zhou, J. Abawajy, Reinforcement learning-based edge server placement in the 
intelligent internet of vehicles environment, 2025, pp. 1–11.
[26] Z. Zhou, M. Shojafar, J. Abawajy, H. Yin, H. Lu, ECMS: An edge intelligent energy 
eﬃcient model in mobile edge computing, IEEE Transactions on Green Communi-
cations and Networking 6 (1) (2021) 238–247.
[27] Z. Zhou, M. Shojafar, M. Alazab, F. Li, IECL: an intelligent energy consumption 
model for cloud manufacturing, IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf. 18 (12) (2022) 8967–8976.
[28] M. Chen, A. Liu, N.N. Xiong, Y. Ren, H.H. Song, Anns: an intelligent advanced non-
convex non-smooth scheme for irs-aided next generation mobile communication 
networks, IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput. 24 (9) (2025) 8959–8973.
[29] M. Chen, A. Liu, N.N. Xiong, H. Song, V.C. Leung, SGPL: An intelligent game-based 
secure collaborative communication scheme for metaverse over 5g and beyond net-
works, IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 42 (3) (2023) 767–782.
[30] M. Chen, A. Liu, W. Liu, K. Ota, M. Dong, N.N. Xiong, RDRL: A recurrent deep rein-
forcement learning scheme for dynamic spectrum access in reconﬁgurable wireless 
networks, IEEE Trans. Network Sci. Eng. 9 (2) (2021) 364–376.
[31] A. Liu, B. Feng, B. Xue, Deepseek-v3 technical report, Technical Report, arXiv 
preprint, 2024.
[32] R. Kong, Y. Li, W. Wang, L. Kong, Y. Liu, Serving moe models on resource-
constrained edge devices via dynamic expert swapping, IEEE Trans. Comput. 74 
(8) (2025) 2799–2811.
[33] J. Wang, H. Du, D. Niyato, J. Kang, Z. Xiong, D.I. Kim, K.B. Letaief, Toward scal-
able generative ai via mixture of experts in mobile edge networks, IEEE Wireless 
Commun. 32 (1) (2024) 142–149.
[34] H. Li, L. Duan, Theory of mixture-of-experts for mobile edge computing, in: IEEE 
Conference on Computer Communications (IEEE INFOCOM), IEEE, 2025, pp. 1–10.
[35] M. Zhang, J. Fang, Z. Teng, et al, Joint DNN partitioning and task oﬄoading based 
on attention mechanism-aided reinforcement learning, IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Man-
age. 22 (3) (2025) 2914–2927.
[36] H. Djigal, J. Xu, L. Liu, Y. Zhang, Machine and deep learning for resource allocation 
in multi-access edge computing: a survey, IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut. 24 (4) (2022) 
2449–2494.
Juan Fang is a professor in the College of Computer Science, 
Beijing University of Technology (BJUT). She received the 
MS degree from Jilin University of Technology, Changchun, 
China in 1997 and her PhD degree from the College of 
Computer Science, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, 
China in 2005. Her research interests include high perfor-
mance computing, intelligent computing, and edge intelli-
gence.
Yaxin An received his BS degree from Hebei GEO Univer-
sity, Shijiazhuang, China in 2023. Currently, he is working 
toward a MS degree in Computer Technology under the Col-
lege of Computer Science at Beijing University of Technology, 
Beijing, China. He is a student member of CCF.
Computer Networks 278 (2026) 112073 
11 
J. Fang et al.
Yaqi Liu received the MS degree from Beijing University of 
Technology, Beijing, China in 2022. She is currently pursu-
ing the PhD degree at Beijing University of Technology. Her 
research interest is mobile edge computing. She is a student 
member of CCF.
Ziyi Teng received the BS degree from the North China Uni-
versity of Water Resources and Electric Power, Zhengzhou, 
China, in 2019. She is currently pursuing the PhD degree with 
the Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China. Her re-
search interests in mobile edge computing.
Xiaoning Zhai received his BSc in Computer Science and 
Technology at Yanshan University. Cur rently, he is work-
ing toward a MSc degree in Electronic Information under the 
College of Com puter Science Technology at Beijing Univer-
sity of Technology.
Heng Tang received his BS degree from Tianjin University of 
Science and Technology, Tianjin, China in 2023. Currently, 
he is working toward a MS degree in Computer Technology 
under the College of Computer Science at Beijing University 
of Technology, Beijing, China.
Huijie Chen received the PhD degree in computer sience 
from the Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China in 
2020. He currently works in the school of computer science, 
Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China. His research 
interests include Smart Sensing, and mobile edge computing.
Computer Networks 278 (2026) 112073 
12 
