Meta-Learning Multi-armed Bandits for Beam
Tracking in 5G and 6G Networks
Alexander Mattick
Division of Positioning and Networks,
Fraunhofer Institute for Integrated Circuits IIS,
90411 Nuremberg, Germany
George Yammine
Division of Positioning and Networks,
Fraunhofer Institute for Integrated Circuits IIS,
90411 Nuremberg, Germany
Georgios Kontes
Division of Positioning and Networks,
Fraunhofer Institute for Integrated Circuits IIS,
90411 Nuremberg, Germany
Setareh Maghsudi
Ruhr University Bochum,
44801 Bochum, Germany
Christopher Mutschler
Division of Positioning and Networks,
Fraunhofer Institute for Integrated Circuits IIS,
90411 Nuremberg, Germany
Abstract—Beamforming-capable antenna arrays with many
elements enable higher data rates in next generation 5G and
6G networks. In current practice, analog beamforming uses a
codebook of pre-configured beams with each of them radiating
towards a specific direction, and a beam management function
continuously selects optimal beams for moving user equipments
(UEs). However, large codebooks and effects caused by reflec-
tions or blockages of beams make an optimal beam selection
challenging. In contrast to previous work and standardization
efforts that opt for supervised learning to train classifiers to
predict the next best beam based on previously selected beams
we formulate the problem as a partially observable Markov
decision process (POMDP) and model the environment as the
codebook itself. At each time step, we select a candidate beam
conditioned on the belief state of the unobservable optimal
beam and previously probed beams. This frames the beam
selection problem as an online search procedure that locates
the moving optimal beam. In contrast to previous work, our
method handles new or unforeseen trajectories and changes in
the physical environment, and outperforms previous work by
orders of magnitude.
Index Terms—Multi-armed bandits, beam selection, rein-
forcement learning, 5G+ networks.
I. Introduction
The envisioned transition to 5G and 6G technologies
has started to transform the properties of established
communication networks with very high transmission rates
that are realized through usage of with Multiple Input
Multiple Output (MIMO) antennas. However, the signal
strength of the millimeter and terahertz signals used
becomes too low to be reliably detectable by receivers.
Hence, at the core of this transformation also lies the
capability of Base Stations (BSs) to utilize directional
beams for transmission towards a User Equipment (UE)
served by the network. These narrowly targeted beams
allow for more eﬀicient usage of the frequency spectrum.
Usually, a (large) library of predetermined directional
beams (i.e., a codebook) is available, and the question is
which beam needs to serve a specific UE at any point in
time. The beam tracking (Giordani et al., 2018) problem
is even more complicated. As UEs are also moving along
unknown trajectories, the BS needs to decide (in real-time)
which beam needs to be used for tracking the UE.
The core challenge of beam management is that the
location of the UE is usually unknown. Even if we
would first try to locate the UE (which itself is not
trivial as positioning requires a coordinated procedure
involving several BSs and the network) we still do not
know the surrounding environment with all its material
properties and their effect on radio waves propagation –
this would be necessary for e.g. a digital twin solution
where beams are selected based on a path tracing from
the BS to the UE. In fact, even if we had such an accurate
3D scan of the environment (with absorptive/reflective
properties), we cannot guarantee that this scan is going
to be up-to-date with recent changes in the environment,
e.g., trees with/without leaves, parking cars, etc. Beyond
that, beam management has strong real-time constraints:
If one assumes a non-stationary UE, then the entire
beam-selection problem has to be solved before the UE
has moved from its current position. This has lead to
a reliance on brute-force beamsweeps to select optimal
beams, which is both energy-intensive and not scalable to
large codebooks.
We propose a novel method relying on Reinforcement
Learning (RL) that aims to select the correct beam solely
based on the received signal strength (RSS) feedback
rather than using the ground truth position or 3D models.
We utilize a temporal prediction system that exploits the
locality of the UE’s movement, without needing explicit
arXiv:2512.05680v1  [cs.LG]  5 Dec 2025
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
41
42
43
44
45
46
𝑝!
48
49
50
31
32
𝑝"
34
𝑝#
36
37
38
39
40
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
11
12
13
14
15
𝑝"#
17
𝑝"!
19
20
1
2
3
𝑝""
5
6
7
8
9
10
optimal beam IDs and received power
selected beam IDs measured power
blocker
reflector
physical environment
codebook
GRU
GRU
GRU
…
…
𝑡!
𝑡#
𝑡"
𝑡!
𝑡#
𝑡"
𝐼𝐷, 𝑝"
GRU
GRU
GRU
…
…
𝐼𝐷, 𝑝"!
𝐼𝐷, 𝑝"#
𝐼𝐷, 𝑝""
𝑔$
ℎ$
Dir(.)
Categorical
GMM
MLP
Multivariate Gaussian
…
𝑟$!
#
𝑟$!
%&
𝑟$!
!
𝑟$!
'(
variational distribution
model distribution
∀𝑝!:   𝑟"!=
𝑝!
max
#$%…'( 𝑝#
calculate normalized RSS distribution
over beam indices for last time step:
predict goal state
𝛿(𝑔")
prior
<copy>
𝜎(⋅)
𝒩(ℎ")
<copy>
prior
predict search state
Fig. 1: Schematic view of our approach: an agent (carrying a UE) moves through the environment. The line-of-sight
(LOS) between the UE and the base station might be blocked and signals might be received via reflectors. During UE
tracking, we select beam IDs from the codebook (orange) while the optimal beams are shown in green (darkness of
colors encode larger timestamps). The right panel illustrates the learning process based on available trajectories: the
left side depicts the variational distribution, and the right side shows the model distribution. The upper half models
the unobservable goal state of the problem, while the lower half represents the exploration state.
or implicit location estimation. To do this, we employ
the framework of the “Restless Multi-Armed Bandit”
(RMAB) to facilitate online search using a pre-trained
neural network. As our method only uses a small stochastic
neural network as a predictor, our beam selections are
fast, without needing any raytracing or brute-force search.
We show that our approach is robust against transfer to
unknown trajectories and unseen environments and that
we outperform existing RL approaches on the order of
magnitudes in the number of beams to be probed to
achieve high reference signal received power (RSRP).
The paper is structured as follows. We discuss related
work in Sec. II. Sec. IV provides background information
on POMDPs, the RMAB framework, and beamforming.
Sec. VI formalizes the problem, describes our model, and
discusses its instantiation. Secs. VII and VIII describe the
experimental setup and results. Sec. IX concludes.
II. Related Work
There has been significant work trying to improve upon
naive beam-sweeps for beam selection. Bai et al. (2024)
uses an LSTM and supervised learning to regress on the
correct beam-id. (Maggi et al., 2024) provide a great
overview on when to use RL and when to use other
(e.g. supervised or stochastic programming) techniques
in radio communications. Maggi et al. (2023) utilize a
sophisticated Bayesian optimization framework to select
beams in a Bayes-optimal sense. They first sample M
beams and then build a Gaussian Process Model to give
a stochastic estimate over the codebook entries. The
selection is now performed according to a parallelized
variant of the expected-improvement acquisition function.
Aykin et al. (2020) use traditional Thompson sampling
(i.e., time-independent search) to locate the optimal beam.
This method is quite similar to ours, but relies on
the assumption that radio signals change slowly as no
dynamics (e.g., UE movement) are taken into account
during beam selection. Our framework is designed for the
opposite case: We assume that a UE might constantly
move and therefore our search has to constantly readjust
its own belief about beam quality.
RMABs were originally proposed by Whittle (1988) for
optimizing resource allocation using classical Lagrange-
multiplier and Gittins-index methods (Gittins, 1979) un-
der the assumption that the dynamics are fully known.
Recent approaches study unknown dynamics, e.g., Liu
et al. (2010) analyze RMABs using iterative “explo-
ration” and “exploitation” phases. However, theoretical
guarantees can generally only be given under strong
assumptions on system parameters. Another recent area of
research distinguishes between exogenous and endogenous
systems (Gafni et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2010). Meshram
et al. (2017) consider a POMDP scenario in which the
unknown stochastic process is estimated using a Hidden
Markov Model (HMM) under binary rewards. Meshram
et al. (2016) analyze the behavior of Thompson sam-
pling (Thompson, 1933), in the restless single-arm setting
with binary reward. The closest work to ours is probably
Jung and Tewari (2019) and Jung et al. (2019) who use
Thompson sampling for RMABs and a similar deploy-then-
update routine. However, in addition to their use of a
deterministic policy (while we use a stochastic one) just
like most prior work they assume the rewards are binary.
From an RL point of view, several studies have ex-
plored the problem of beam selection in millimeter-wave
(mmWave) communication systems. One notable work
is proposed by Raj and Kalyani (2020) who use Deep
Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) to address the
blind beam selection problem, i.e., to replace traditional
beam sweeping techniques. Another approach investigates
the optimality and robustness of both the Deep Q-Network
(DQN) and DDPG to the beam selection problem (Lee
et al., 2020). A closely related approach by Sim et al.
(2018) uses online contextual bandits and fast machine
learning (FML) for contextual multi-armed bandits. How-
ever, their approach makes significantly more assumptions
on the environment (i.e., straight bi-directional road where
cars send direction indicators, both being used as a
static context for the bandit) and assumes vastly smaller
codebooks of which 1/4th are allowed to send at once.
From the point of view of Beam selection, most systems
still rely on beam sweeps across a finite codebook of
beam directions. Practical deployments tend to rely on
codebooks as the directions can be aligned well to real
world hardware limitations, e.g. quantized phases. While
slow, exhaustive beam sweeps produce good results after
search (see also (Bea, 2018)). One can further refine
this by hierarchical sampling where one descends from
coarse, wide beams toward narrower beams across multiple
measurements (see for an overview (Ichkov, 2025)). The
downside of these methods is the lack of speed as even
in the hierarchical setting many low-performing beams
have to be tried before a good ones are found. Further, in
dynamic scenarios the optimal beam might have shifted
by the time the UE is located. In our problem we assume a
fast moving UE (or, analogously narrow beams), meaning
that only one (or a small number) beam can be trialed
in each iteration before the UE position has changed.
This reduces exhaustive search to essentially a random
search, since exhaustive exploration is stateless between
UE position changes.
More involved approaches utilize optimization algo-
rithms that may be coupled to the HW properties of
a specific basestation. For instance, Singh et al. (2022)
uses manifold optimization to build a hybrid analog-
digital beamforming system. While these methods are
undoubtedly interesting, the analysis of the hardware-
software co-design of real world basestations is out of scope
for our work.
While these prior works have made significant contribu-
tions to the field, it is important to note that deterministic
methods may be suboptimal in scenarios where predic-
tions involve uncertainty, particularly when considering
unknown receiver positions. In mmWave communication
systems, the probabilistic nature of predictions plays a
crucial role due to factors such as channel fading, noise,
and environmental changes. Therefore, it is imperative
to account for the inherent uncertainty and adaptability
requirements when addressing the beam selection problem.
III. Problem Description
The beam selection problem is a necessary sub-task for
beamforming antenna arrays: Given a fixed codebook A
of N possible beam directions to choose from, the beam
selection problem involves finding the beam a ∈A that
maximizes the Received Signal Strength (RSS) to a UE
with a minimal amount of measurements of codebook
entries. Ideally, one would have access to the UEs location
and moving direction, as well as a 3D model of the
environment including material properties to facilitate e.g.,
raytracing based solutions, but this is usually not possible:
In 3GPP, the UEs location and movement direction is not
available for beam selection due to privacy concerns, and
even if those were available gathering a 3D model with
material properties is intractable.
For this reason, we assume a black-box structure, where
we have no information about the environment, reflections,
or even the azimuth and elevation of each beam in the
codebook. To solve this problem, we search for an optimal
beam by choosing k = 1 beams from the codebook and
update our choice based on the measured RSS. Since
UEs usually do not have a fixed position, we also predict
a correction factor g which is used by the beam-choice
algorithm to correct for the movement of the UE. This
way, the beam selection problem decomposes into a state-
estimation problem for the correction factor g, and a
decision problem for finding the optimal beam. This opti-
mization problem is the typical scenario for Reinforcement
Learning (RL), where one aims to maximize the long-term
discounted cumulative reward (RSS) just by interacting
with the environment.
IV. Background
A. Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement Learning (RL) describes a field of study
that attempts to solve sequential Markov Decision Pro-
cesses (MDPs). An MDP consists of a set of states s ∈S,
actions a ∈A, reward R : S × A →R, a transition
distribution (typically unknown) T : S × A →S, and
a discount factor γ. We train a decision making policy
π : S →A that selects actions in states. Our objective
is to find the optimal policy π∗, which maximizes the
expected discounted sum of future rewards:
π∗= argmaxπ E
"tmax
X
t=0
γtR(st, at)π(at|st)T(st+1|st, at)
#
,
where 0 ≤γ < 1 can be configured to trade immediate
over future rewards and guarantees boundedness of the
expectation (Sutton and Barto, 2018). In our case, we
assume a POMDP setting, which further differentiates
between observations O1:t and states s1:t. “Observations”
are measurements we directly get from the environment
(e.g. RSS values), while “states” include unobserved infor-
mation, such as the UE’s ground truth position.
In this work we follow a standard POMDP formulation:
A POMDP is defined as a 7-tuple (S, A, T, R, Ω, O, γ). The
definitions are largely the same as in the ordinary MDP
with the extension of an explicit observation set Ωand
conditional observation probabilities conditioned on the
current (hidden) state O : S ×A×Ω→R. In other words,
O is the probability of observing O ∈Ωin state S ∈S
after executing action A, and γ ∈[0, 1) is the reward
discount factor.
POMDPs reduce to ordinary MDPs in the case of S = Ω,
but if S ̸= Ω, the agent only observes partial information
of the true state. This makes POMDPs significantly more
challenging to solve as the agent also has to account for
the uncertainty induced by the necessary state estimation.
Let b : S →R be the belief state over a state s. The agent
maintains the belief state by updating it with received
observations and actions:
b(s′) ∝O(o | s′, a)
X
s∈S
T(s′ | s, a)b(s),
(1)
as derived in (Kaelbling et al., 1998).
This problem generally becomes diﬀicult in practice due
to the fact that the exact observation probabilities O(o |
s′, a) and transition probabilities T(s′ | s, a) are unknown.
In the case of beam selection, the unknown part of the
state is the position/change of position of the UE.
B. Multi-Armed Bandits (MABs)
The multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is formally
equivalent to a one-state Markov decision process. Here,
we assume a stationary environment with respect to an
agent’s actions: no matter which action a ∈A the agent
takes, it will not change the state. In the MAB setting,
the primary objective is to estimate the action (referred to
as an “arm”) that maximizes the expected utility/reward.
However, it is also crucial to balance exploration and
exploitation, meaning that the agent must actively explore
different actions to optimize its long-term performance.
The MAB model is built to learn the optimal tradeoff
between discovering new high performing actions, while
also maintaining high cumulative rewards.
If one assumes full access to the payoff distributions, one
can solve MABs directly using an index policy known as
the Gittins-index (Gittins, 1979). However, since in prac-
tice these are not known, one can use highly eﬀicient ap-
proximations, such as Thompson-sampling (TS) (Thomp-
son, 1933), which updates the expected utility of each
arm using Bayes’ rule. The high eﬀiciency makes MABs
very popular in online decision-making scenarios such as
recommender systems (Zhou et al., 2017), black-box opti-
mization (Dimmery et al., 2019), anomaly detection (Ding
et al., 2019), healthcare (Durand et al., 2018), and machine
learning (Gagliolo and Schmidhuber, 2008).
The limitation of MABs compared to “normal” Rein-
forcement Learning is that one has to assume stationarity
in the payoff distribution. Stationarity here refers to
the distribution behind each arm not changing during
sampling, which makes modeling dynamic problems (such
as moving UEs) impossible. Fortunately, many extensions
to the MAB problem exist that relax this assumption,
allowing one to use variants of the MAB algorithms on
dynamic problems. One of the most unrestricted these
realizations is the Restless MAB.
C. Restless MABs (RMABs)
We utilize an extension of the MAB framework, some-
times referred to as a “restless” MAB. In this extension,
we assume that there exists an unobservable stochastic
transition system P(st+1 | st) that rotates through hidden
states s ∈S and that changes the payoff distribution
behind each arm. More precisely, one assumes the exis-
tence of Markov transitions Pa, P¯a that change all arm
distributions depending on whether arm a was selected
(Pa) or not selected (P¯a). Note that RMABs are only
partially observable as we only “see” the outcome of arms
we actually sample.
Solving RMABs is computationally intractable, as op-
timal policies are NP-hard to compute even in the finite
horizon setting (Papadimitriou and Tsitsiklis, 1994). One
possible heuristic is to study a time-averaged version of
RMABs which yields the Whittle-index (Whittle, 1988).
Unfortunately, the Whittle-index is itself generally only a
heuristic1. Further, because the index is computed offline
and fixed, any model mismatch or estimation error persists
- there is no inherent mechanism to adjust the index
in light of new observations. This implies that finding
an index policy is hard to frame as a machine learning
problem: Exploration vs Exploitation of different indices
is not trivial to include in index policies.
Recent advancements in learning RMABs suggest that
Thompson Sampling (Granmo, 2010), which is an asymp-
totically optimal Bayesian technique for solving ordinary
MABs, can be trivially adapted towards a close to optimal
RMAB algorithm (Jung and Tewari, 2019) in the episodic
setting. The Bayesian nature of TS and the episodic
setting makes this a prime candidate for the introduction
of machine learning into RMAB solving.
V. Beam Selection as RMAB
In this work, we model the beam tracking problem as
an RMAB by considering the set of arms A to be the
codebook of beams (see, for instance, the upper left part
of Fig. 1: the codebook consists of beamforming vectors
(or precoding vectors), each of them corresponding to a
specific beam direction or pattern), S to be the description
of the location of the UE and the RSS value of all beams
in the codebook, while the arm transitions Pa, P¯a are
(implicitly) given by the movement of the UE. Note that
for beam selection, we can assume that Pa = P¯a since
1For instance, one has to guarantee indexability, which corresponds
to the set of unplayed arms growing monotonically as the underlying
lagrangian increases.
a UE’s movement can be assumed to be independent of
which beam was selected. This means that while we still
have a state-evolution in all arms (even the ones that
have not been tried), the state change is independent from
the arm selection. The major challenge in treating beam
tracking as an RL problem is that we only observe the
part of the state (beam RSS) we end up measuring while
the rest of the state remains unknown: Beam selection is
a POMDP.
Since solving such an RMAB is computationally in-
tractable, we treat the RMAB as an episodic task similar
to (Jung and Tewari, 2019) which allows us to use a
machine learning approach to solve the RMAB: Specifi-
cally, we split the RMAB inference into two parts. First,
we collect N episodes by running TS in simulation and
train a recurrent neural network to predict TS’s action
distribution by updating the parameters θ of a stochastic
neural network. Second, during deployment, the resulting
network is now capable of approximating the optimal
beam distribution from just the sequence of previously
tried (beam-id, rss) values, without needing any further
training (online inference phase).
Since we train a suitable network during the offline
training phase, the online inference phase is as fast as
a single forward pass through the neural network.
VI. Meta-Learning Multi-armed Bandits
For our beam-selection problem, we consider an N-
armed bandit, where N is the size of our codebook, and
“pulling” an arm ai means measuring the received power
ri at arm ai. Unfortunately, naive application of existing
approaches runs into the issue of distribution shift: As the
UE moves through the environment the hidden state st
determining the arm-payoff keeps changing. Accounting
for this change in arm-payoff necessitates using a more
complex arm distribution model, which is intractable to
solve online using e. g., MCMC. The following sections will
cover how we solve the distribution shift (Section VI-A)
and the inference complexity issues (Section VI-B).
A. Distribution shift in the underlying reward process
In contrast to ordinary MABs where the arm distri-
bution is assumed to be stationary, the beam quality
distribution shifts as the unobservable UE moves. We solve
this with an estimator P g(gt+1 | o1:t) that attempts to
predict the optimal beam ID given all previous observation
up until the current time step. This tries to account
for the distribution shift in the Multi-Armed Bandit
distribution induced by the movement of the UE. We
approximate a second distribution P s(rt+1(a) | o1:t, gt+1)
that, intuitively, acts as the actual MAB process that
aims at solving the exploration-exploitation trade-off, i.e.,
accurately predicting the expected signal strength rt+1(a)
of beam ID a, given all previous observations and the
prediction of the optimal beam ID. The resulting RMAB
model is:
P(rt+1(a), gt+1 | o1:t) =
P s(rt+1(a) | o1:t, gt+1)
|
{z
}
bandit “search” head
P g(gt+1 | o1:t)
|
{z
}
prediction “heatmap”
,
(2)
where o1:t is the set of observed values up to timestep t,
gt+1 is the estimated optimal beam id at time step t + 1,
and rt+1(a) is the reward distribution at time step t + 1
when choosing action a ∈A.
The main purpose of P g is to account for the distri-
bution shift induced by a moving receiver, with the goal
of correcting the P s distribution such that the sampling
process becomes a static distribution estimation problem
from the point-of-view of the search head P s.
B. Meta-Learning ahead of time
The second problem is how to make the distribution esti-
mation tractable. Normally, Bayesian estimation through
methods such as Markov-chain Monte-Carlo (MCMC)
(Tierney, 1994) or Stein’s variational descent (Liu and
Wang, 2019), become intractable to do online due to the
large number of iterations they require, especially when
using uninformative distributions as starting points. At
worst, as the UE is constantly moving it might have
already moved away from the selected beam by the time
inference is complete. Hence, we propose meta-learning
a distribution ahead of time, such that updating the
estimate with further observations ot+1 is only as diﬀicult
as executing a stochastic function.
For this reason, we propose using a recent approach
known as stochastic variational inference (SVI) (Hoffman
et al., 2013) to generate the distributions. SVI approxi-
mates the intractable posterior of the latent variable z
given the observed values x (from some dataset), using a
different, parameterized distribution Qϕ, which is obtained
by minimizing the KL divergence between P and Q:
min
¯ϕ,¯θ DKL(Q ¯ϕ(z) ∥P¯θ(z | x)) .
(3)
Note that the variational distribution Q does not depend
on the elements of the dataset x, making it trivial to
sample from, without requiring the intractable distribu-
tion P(x). Instead, the information on the dataset x is
amortized into the variational parameters ϕ during train-
ing, which can be achieved eﬀiciently by minimizing the
KL-divergence or equivalently maximizing the Evidence
Lower Bound (ELBO):
ELBO = EQ(z|o1:t)[log(P s
ϕ(rt+1(a)|z, gt+1))+
log(P g
ϕ(gt+1|z)) + log(P(z)) −log Qθ(z|o1:t)],
(4)
where P(z) is an arbitrary prior over the latent variables
z. We use this SVI pipeline to train a policy π which
is then fixed during deployment, effectively offloading
the complexity of updating the posterior away from the
inference time onto training time.
C. Online Inference
For the case of online inference, we need the previous
observations o1:t as input since those are the observations
that we will have when exploring the environment online.
The KL divergence between variational and model distri-
bution from Eq. (3) is only valid if we assume that only the
data provided in the dataset is relevant to the prediction
(as only those get amortized into the parameters). In the
case of online prediction of some datapoint o1:t we also
have to condition our distribution on the observations.
SVI allows us to amortize the dataset x into the trainable
parameter. In our case, we can optimize this distribution
by simply conditioning P on the current set of observations
o1:t. An observation o consists of both the received power
and the measured beam, giving us o = (RSS, beam-id).
The objective containing the online conditioning on o1:t
is described by
min
¯ϕ,¯θ DKL(Q ¯ϕ(z | o1:t, rt+1(a)) ∥
P¯θ(z | o1:t, x, rt+1(a), g1:t)) .
(5)
In words: We align the distribution Q ¯ϕ that does not
know x to P¯θ, which does know x. This naturally forces
the information in the dataset x into the parameters ¯ϕ
and ¯θ.
Since we have a goal state gt+1 and an arm sampling
state rt+1(a), we also partition the latent along the same
line z = (zg, zs). The latent variable random z learned
using this objective can now be used inside the distribution
to
P(rt+1(a), gt+1 | o1:t, x) ∝P s
¯θ (rt+1(a) | zs, g1:t+1)
P g
¯θ (gt+1 | zg)Q ¯ϕ(zg, zs|o1:t),
where gt+1 is the “goal” beam, i.e. the best-beam estimate
used to correct for UE movement, z is the latent parameter,
and rt+1(a) is the distribution of returns for arm a. Note
that our model is factorized into the two components
“search” and “goal”, as shown in Eq. 2.
The information from the dataset x here is amor-
tized into the static weights θ and ϕ. The model can
now be trained by executing the current distribution in
the environment using Thompson sampling (Thompson,
1933), storing the gathered datapoints in our dataset, and
training the next distribution on the extended dataset (see
Fig. 1).
During inference, we treat the parameters θ and ϕ as
static, and simply choose the maximal arm from a vector
of samples from the learned P s
θ (rt+1(a)|z, o1:t)P g
ϕ(z | o1:t)
distribution, see Thompson sampling (Thompson, 1933).
D. Practical Considerations
We approximate the beam selection process hierar-
chically and chose to model the prediction heatmap
P g(gt+1 | o1:t) as a categorical distribution with an
uninformative Dirichlet prior with all αi = 1. The bandit
search head P s(rt+1(a) | o1:t, gt+1) is implemented as
a three layer MLP with skip-connections that receives
both the categorical prediction gt+1 and the observations
o1:t in the form of a hidden state ht with a Gaussian
mixture model prior (see Fig. 1). To predict the posterior
z consisting of the goal-latent gt and the search-latent ht,
we utilize two gated recurrent units (GRU) (Cho et al.,
2014) that receive the sequence of previous observations as
inputs. For increased stability, we normalize the received
power measurements “per frame” meaning we divide the
RSS by the maximally receivable power at that timestep
rt(i) =
pi
maxk=1...N pk
,
(6)
where pi is the raw measured RSS for beam ID i and
the denominator refers to the RSS of the best beam ID
(i.e., the highest RSS that is achievable). The objective
of this is to prevent the model from being able to
completely ignore learning the dynamics of states where
all codebook entries have poor RSS values. Note that the
model remains trainable if we remove the normalization,
but the convergence is slower. We only normalize the
reward but not the observation: During deployment we
only measure individual beams, which means we cannot
normalize based on the best beam. To not introduce a
domain shift between training and inference, we keep the
observations unnormalized.
To further increase stability we use automatic Rao-
Blackwellization in the stochastic programming library
pyro (see e.g. Schulman et al. (2015a) and Blackwell
(1947)) and a batchsize of 64 full trajectories consisting of
200 steps each. For exploration, we utilize a simulated en-
vironment with 12 parallel agents and a total exploration
budget of 500, 000 steps in our simulated environment.
Algorithm 1 Pseudocode of our method: During acting,
we sample according to the currently learned distribution
and record all actions, observations, and goal states in a
buffer. Batches from the buffer oN
1:T , rN
1:T (a), gN
1:T are later
used during training to optimize the parameters ϕ, θ.
function act(Pϕ, Qθ, o1:t)
z ∼Q(z|o1:t)
gt+1 ∼P g(gt+1|z)
rt+1(a) ∼P s(rt+1(a)|z, gt+1)
select beam argmaxa rt+1(a)
observe RSS for ot+1 = (a, RSS)
during training: also observe gt+1
end function
function train(Pϕ, Qθ, o1:T , r1:T (a), g1:T )
for all t ∈{1, . . . , T} do
Estimate ELBO using Eq 4
update ϕ, θ using Adam.
end for
end function
1
2
3
4
Fig. 2: Visualization of the simulation environment: The
UE (black cross) moves around the environment following
the dashed path. At each step, the link between the BSs
(black square) and the UE is checked for obstructions.
Here, if a link is obstructed it is plotted in red and blue
otherwise.
To account for the fact that our exploration dataset
grows as we continue exploring, we scale the number of
training steps after each round of exploration to
steps =
$
C
r
|D|
batchsize
%
,
where |D| is the current dataset size. We set C = 3 to
roughly match the expected number of training iterations
to the number of environment rollouts in each training
episode. This is not an extensively tuned parameter and
is only used to align the number of updates to the dataset
size and therefore reduce the total amount of compute
necessary. We use the ADAM optimizer (Kingma and Ba,
2014) with a learning rate of 3×10−4. Algorithm 1 shows
the pseudo code of our algorithm.
VII. Experimental Setup
Geometries. We consider three slightly different envi-
ronments for our benchmark: First an environment with
a single basestation and flexible real-world configurations
(e.g. with/without certain signal blockers and reflectors).
This is aimed to show robustness against real world
variation. Second, we consider a setting with 4 basestations
and different codebook sizes to investigate scaling across
different numbers of beams and basestation positions.
Finally, in order to also investigate moving the UE at
different speeds through the environment we instantiate
an environment with different total speeds.
Simulation environment and geometry. We designed and
implemented a simulator to generate the required radio
channels and to obtain the input RSS values. We set up a
simulation environment in Matlab with a geometry that is
representative of a typical urban scenario. We place four
base stations in the environment and let their panels point
into a specific directions, see Fig. 2.
To model complex environments, we add objects that
act as blockers and attenuate the received signal, or
as reflectors. They are defined using different shapes,
sizes and locations. When acting as blockers, signals are
attenuated (with a varying amount between experiments,
imitating different materials) when passing through. When
acting as reflectors, the signal power drops to account
for reflection losses. We apply such parameters based on
experimental data (Hosseini et al., 2021).
The
radio
channels
are
generated
using
QuaDRiGa
(Jaeckel
et
al.,
2014).
For
the
system
model,
we
chose
a
carrier
frequency
of
28 GHz,
a
bandwidth of 100 MHz, OFDM modulation, and 64
active
sub-carriers.
The
base
stations
are
modeled
with uniform rectangular array antenna panels with
half-wavelength-separated
elements.
For
beamforming,
discrete analog DFT-based (Tse and Viswanath, 2005)
codebooks of predefined azimuth and elevation pointing
angles are designed given a panel design similar to that
from Fig. 1. For simplicity, the UE is equipped with an
omni-directional antenna (i.e., no beamforming).
UE trajectories and movements. Using QuaDRiGa, we
define the environment layout and place the 4 base
stations and blockers. We then randomly defined a tra-
jectory for the UE using 4 anchor points defining a track
around the middle blocker when present, otherwise similar
tracks are used when the blocker is not present in the
environment. We project a ray from each BS to the
UE for each spatial sampling point on this track and
count the intersections with blockers and attenuate the
signal accordingly. Once this info is obtained, we generate
the frequency-domain channel coeﬀicients including the
environmental attenuation. Unless stated otherwise, we
use 70% of the generated trajectories for training 15% for
testing and 15% for validation.
Evaluation metric. For our evaluation, we assume a
system without noise and only line-of-sight (LOS) or
obstructed LOS paths and no multipath signals. As a
measure, we define the RSS indicator as the received power
calculated in the frequency domain. Even though we do
not consider more sophisticated network topologies in this
work, in order to clearly compare the performance of our
approach with the available baseline solutions, the task at
hand remains a challenge whose complexity stems from
the availability of multiple BSs with large codebooks.
Computing infrastructure. For all experiments we used
a machine equipped with 32GB memory, an Nvidia
RTX3090 GPU and an AMD Ryzen 5800X3D CPU. We
did not experience any hardware bottlenecks as we were
mainly constrained by the inherent sequentiallity of our
model and SVI itself.
TABLE I: Test optimal beam classification of training and
validating on different dataset combinations. This shows
the RSS/top-1/top-5 accuracy of classifying the optimal
beam for unknown trajectories.
tested on 60 beams
trained on
no blocker
blocker
blocker ref
no blocker
176.43 / 70% / 91%
159.06 / 51% / 73%
160.99 / 55% / 78%
blocker
143.94 / 52% / 75%
163.54 / 53% / 76%
156.25 / 52% / 75%
blocker ref
120.18 / 36% / 64%
132.74 / 35% / 62%
141.88 / 40% / 70%
random
18.12 / 2% / 8%
37.76 / 2% / 8%
31.78 / 2% / 8%
VIII. Evaluation
We investigate the robustness of the selection policies
learned by our method by evaluating across unseen trajec-
tories and environments (Section VIII-A), codebook sizes
and basestation positions (Section VIII-B), movement
speeds of UEs (Section VIII-C), and close this with an ab-
lation of the size of the correction model (Section VIII-D).
Since we assume a small number of beam evaluations
for every timestep, we do not directly compare against
exhaustive beam sweeps since they would either be
essentially random (one beam evaluation per timestep
while the UE is moving) or would break the beam
evaluation budget by an order of magnitude or more2.
Instead, we demonstrate the performance of our MAB-
based approach by comparing it against state-of-the-art
solutions from the field of communications (Maggi et al.,
2023) and Reinforcement Learning (Schulman et al., 2017)
(Section VIII-E). Additionally, we offer an uncertainty
estimation experiment in Section A, which showcases how
our method can dynamically delegate to e.g. full beam
sweeps if its uncertainty is high.
A. Robustness and Generalization across Trajectories and
Environments
We evaluate the robustness of our approach to changes
in the environment. To do so, we consider only BS2 (see
Figure 2) and use a codebook consisting of 60 beams
while varying the physical topology of the environment.
Specifically, we instantiate three versions of the environ-
ment from Fig. 2: (1) without the central cuboid blocker
(“no blocker”), (2) with the blocker (“blocker”, ), and
(3) with both the blocker and reflections (“blocker ref”).
BS2 is placed 10 m above the ground, pointing towards
the central “blocker”. We train a control policy for BS2
on 3 different trajectory types, each with 350 instances
for 200 timesteps each, and record all 60 codebook power
indicators. For testing we do the same but use unseen
trajectory types.
Table I shows the results. We report the normalized
achieved RSS and the top-1 and top-5 accuracy (i.e.,
if our method chooses the best or one of the top-5
best beams). As we normalize the reward per timestep,
2We do report the performance of random selection and report
the achieved RSS as a percentage of the optimal (exhaustive sweep)
beam
TABLE II: Ablation across codebook sizes and basestation
position. Reported are the percentage of the maximum
cumulative RSS / raw cumulative RSS. Test results shown
here on unseen trajectories.
low attenuation
high attenuation
5 × 5
9 × 9
11 × 11
5 × 5
9 × 9
11 × 11
BS1
27% / 0.63
13% / 1.16
28% / 6.03
28% / 0.61
15% / 1.01
50% / 10.46
BS2
92% / 7.91
91% / 27.90
81% / 65.13
94% / 7.36
92% / 28.18
70% / 48.82
BS3
90% / 4.67
82% / 13.96
91% / 42.61
94% / 4.73
92% / 16.27
91% / 43.32
BS4
93% / 4.43
68% / 10.27
57% / 18.11
93% / 4.38
69% / 9.29
55% / 17.51
the total achievable reward is 200 (number of steps in
each trajectory). Noticeable at first glance, our method
performs overall well as it collects the vast majority of the
achievable reward. Note that the theoretical limit of 200
is only achievable if the agent may predict the movement
of the UE perfectly. The “random” results correspond
to a naive beam-sweeping procedure that takes 60 time
steps to probe all the beams. From these results we can
conclude that our method is robust against modest to large
changes in the physical environment with our model only
negligibly sacrificing reward. One particularly interesting
artifact is the better performance on the “blocker ref”
environment that we obtain training without the blocker
instead of training on “blocker ref” directly. We believe
this to be due to the higher complexity of the blocker ref
environment yielding slower convergence and a generally
overly conservative policy.
Beyond classical robustness to changes in the domain,
we are also able to quantify our method’s uncertainty due
to the usage of Bayesian inference. This can be quite useful
to e.g., use classical methods once the agent hits consistent
high uncertainty or to trigger additional training. We
accomplish this by predicting the chance of error directly
from the internally predicted variances. We demonstrate
an initial study showing our model’s ability to quantify
its own uncertainty and switch to full-beam sweeps in
Appendix A. While these results already show promise,
we leave a more thorough analysis of how to strategically
switch between different beam-selection algorithms for
future work.
B. Impact of Codebook Size and Basestation Position
We
consider
different
configurations
of
the
beam
and basestation topology. Specifically we study another
“blocker ref” scenario, but now choose from 3 different
codebook sizes (5×5, 9×9, 11×11) and 4 different basesta-
tion positions (BS1, BS2, BS3, BS4). We ablate the effect
of blocker strength by considering both a low attenuation
and a high attenuation blocker (infinite strength). Finally,
we increase the trajectory length to 390 steps to validate
long-range inference performance. Hence, in total we train
3×4×2=24 policies. This experiment design demonstrates
that our approach works on a variety of settings with
different underlying transition distributions and codebook
sizes.
TABLE III: Top-3 accuracy across codebook sizes and
basestation position.
low attenuation
high attenuation
5 × 5
9 × 9
11 × 11
5 × 5
9 × 9
11 × 11
Basestation 1
30%
16%
36%
30%
16%
56%
Basestation 2
98%
95%
88%
96%
95%
78%
Basestation 3
95%
89%
96%
97%
96%
97%
Basestation 4
96%
75%
63%
96%
71%
56%
Table II shows the test results on unseen trajecto-
ries. This benchmark has roughly twice the number of
timesteps per trajectory than the previous environments
and considers two variants across three different codebook
sizes. We found that we needed to increase the amount
of optimization steps to account for the increase in the
number of beams: Specifically, we increased the amount
of compute used by 2×, while keeping the amount of
environment interactions the same.
We additionally report top-3 accuracy results in Ta-
ble III. We report a top-3 accuracy due to the high number
of beam selections with nearly identical performance. We
found that top-3 accuracy generally correlates well with
empirical RSS distributions on our simulation.
We see high performance in all configurations apart
from BS1, which is placed such that it points directly
into the blocker. This means that the difference between
an optimal and a suboptimal beam is small as even
the optimal beam can barely see the UE. As no beam
clearly dominates another, the model continuously ex-
plores different beams rather than sticking to one slightly
better beam. We also observe a lower accuracy in high
dimensional codebooks, which is however balanced out
by the much higher possible transmission rates possible
for larger codebooks. This is expected as more available
actions make the selection problem harder, but the optimal
beam has higher throughput. The normalized RSS drops
for larger codebooks, while the actual received power
increases substantially.
C. Impact of movement speed
We also evaluate the impact of UEs moving at drasti-
cally different speeds. We generate a set of trajectories and
train on different sampling rates (to account for different
movement speeds of the UE): Sampling every timestep
of the trajectories leads to a “base speed” (slowest),
TABLE IV: Expected cumulative RSS as a percentage of
maximally achievable over time. We train and evaluate
models on different speeds and observe consistent perfor-
mance across all different speed ranges.
1.11m/s
2.22m/s
3.33m/s
4.44m/s
model@1.11m/s
74.23%
73.27%
75.12%
75.65%
model@2.22m/s
74.84%
73.99%
74.91%
74.57%
model@3.33m/s
75.04%
74.25%
75.22%
74.87%
model@4.44m/s
74.48%
74.10%
74.81%
75.18%
1
2
3
4
5
·105
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
exploration steps
expected total RSS per episode
depth 5
depth 4
depth 3
depth 2
Fig. 3: Performance comparison between different goal
model sizes on the “no house” environment. We observe
significant performance increases up to a depth of 4.
while skipping every N entries gives an effective speed
of N × base speed. We set our base speed at 1.11m/s and
compare N = 4 speed levels each with a 5 × 5 codebook.
To adequately test this, we generate long trajectories with
500 timesteps, such that “skipping” steps for faster moving
UEs still have enough timesteps to allow for meaningful
comparison. Our models were first trained on random
trajectories in the environment with a total training time
of on average 2.5h.3 After training, inference time is
negligible. Notice that since we only record the RSS
values for each beam, doppler shifts do not affect the
measurements.
The results are shown in Table IV. Our method is robust
against changes in UE speed both during training and
inference. We want to note that the absolute velocities
are not too important for this analysis: only the relative
change between speeds is important from a selection point
of view, since our method makes no assumption on the
physical or antenna configuration. The main change for
faster trajectories is that faster trajectories lead to faster
changes in the codebook values, but the relative speedup
in codebook changes only corresponds to how much of a
multiple of the training speed our method is evaluated at.
D. Impact of Goal-model size
One of the most important elements of the search model
we propose is the implicit correction towards domain shift
introduced by the goal model. For this reason, we compare
different numbers of “goal state” layers (top of fig. 1
against each other.
As shown in Fig 3, performance improves up until a
depth of 4 GRU layers, after which the improvement stops.
We hypothesize that this is due to the model getting
close to representing the “true” goal belief distribution.
3Training time depends on the speed since faster trajectories have
fewer timesteps to train over
TABLE V: GP baseline (Maggi et al., 2023) for differ-
ent speeds and different number of sampled beams per
timestep. Drawing more than 4 samples per timestep is
intractable due to exploding computational and memory
complexity in the GP. For multiple samples we always
assume the best beam is used for transmission.
1.11m/s
2.22m/s
3.33m/s
4.44m/s
samples 1
65.85%
65.68%
67.51%
66.99%
samples 2
78.30%
77.42%
78.84%
78.04%
samples 3
81.44%
79.07%
79.83%
79.35%
samples 4
88.18%
86.27%
87.16%
85.80%
Exceeding the capacity needed to approximate the goal
distribution will not improve overall performance as even
in the limit of perfect belief-state representation, the
model would not be able to accurately capture the true
goal due to partial observability.
E. Comparison against the State of the Art
We compare our method with two contemporary state-
of-the-art methods in intelligent beam selection and RL
respectively. Beam selection. We compare against an
online Bayesian optimization scheme proposed by (Maggi
et al., 2023), which iteratively samples beams from the
codebook according to an acquisition function over a
Gaussian Process (GP) fit on the measured RSS. In
contrast to our work, Maggi et al. (2023) must sample
multiple beams per timestep (configured via an “overhead”
function). As we only samples one beam per timestep4, we
fix the number of beams tried in Maggi et al. (2023) and
compare different per-timestep sampling budgets. For this
we take the same test set used in Section VIII-C.
The results are shown in Table V. Our method is
consistently better than the GP based baseline in the 1
sample case. However, once multiple samples per timestep
can be drawn, the GP baseline starts closing in and
exceeding our method, though at the expected increase
in real-world sampling cost: Trying 2 different beams
corresponds to sampling close to 10% of the codebook
for a 5 × 5 antenna array.
One core issue with GP based solutions is the huge
computational burden involved in fitting GPs to data:
Computing the weights of a GP for a dataset with N
elements corresponds to fitting kernel hyperparameters by
constructing and then inverting a large N × N matrix
multiple times. This quickly becomes intractable in both
memory and compute, especially on edge devices with real
time guarantees. For this method, the dataset grows with
num_timesteps×samples_per_timesteps. This means the
“samples 4” case would yield a matrix of size 2000 × 2000
to construct and invert multiple times.
4Recent work by Karbasi et al. (2021) shows that Thompson
sampling in the ordinary MAB setting can also be parallelized. We
believe an analogous scheme also works for RMABs but leave the
characterization of this scheme for future work.
TABLE VI: Evaluation from the high-attenuation set for
BS4 seen in Table II. The GP method has significantly
lower performance when compared to ours while having
higher computational and memory complexity
1 sample
2 samples
3 samples
4 samples
5x5
10.04%
18.27%
23.61%
28.97%
9x9
4.93%
9.70%
12.09%
14.06%
11x11
2.07%
5.09%
5.69%
6.88%
In practical terms, this means that computing the
results of Table V on an Intel Xeon Gold 5120 server-
CPU across 25 parallel threads takes approx. 13 hours,
while inference for our method in Table IV across a single
thread takes ≈20min on a consumer CPU. This means
our method is approximately 975× more eﬀicient to infer,
with that advantage increasing with larger time horizons.
Further, we expect our runtime to be improveable by e.g.
applying pruning or quantization techniques to the model.
From a complexity point of view, inferencing our
method scales in time with order O(1) while GP solutions
are constrained to scaling in O(T 3). This means that our
method is realtime capable, while GPs generally are not.5
However, an even bigger concern for the GP based
solution is how well these methods scale to larger codebook
sizes. GP based search is well known to behave poorly
when increasing the number of dimensions to search over.
We evaluate Maggi et al. (2023) on the existing 5×5, 9×9
and 11 × 11 codebook grids used for the high attenuation
tests in Table II. As can be seen in Table VI, the GP
based search behaves poorly compared to ours, which we
believe to be due to many irrelevant beams existing in the
set6. While our search can exploit prior knowledge in how
beamsets correlate and, based on that information, discard
low value choices, Maggi et al. (2023) has to discover
these correlations at inference time, severely increasing
the number of samples needed for good coverage. To get
good results on large codebooks one needs to significantly
increase the number of beam-measurements per timestep.
This would increase the memory and compute costs
dramatically. This also implies an implicit dependence
between codebook size and time/memory complexity.
Reinforcement Learning. On the RL side, we further
demonstrate our method’s high performance by comparing
to a tuned PPO agent (Schulman et al., 2017) with the
implementation from (Raﬀin et al., 2021) against our
approach. PPO is a state-of-the-art RL method consisting
of a policy gradient that is constrained to stay within a KL-
Ball to ensure policy updates do not put undue confidence
on low amounts of data (see Schulman et al. (2015b,
5There are ways of speeding up Gaussian processes via, for instance,
Nyström approximation, or using sparse variational GPs (Titsias,
2009). This usually comes with a drop in performance. General
scaling of GPs to big data remains a major challenge, especially
in online learning scenarios.
6Note that the 5 × 5 results are worse than in the “moving UEs
case” due to fewer beams with high performance
0
1
2
3
4
5
·105
2
4
6
8
exploration steps
exp. total RSS / episode
Ours
PPO
Fig. 4: Total RSS of PPO vs. our approach.
2017)). Both our agent and the tuned PPO agent are
given a training budget of 500, 000 steps on the “blocker”
environment. Fig. 4 shows the achieved RSS values on
a validation set over the course of training, with the x-
axis being the total number of exploration steps seen
by each algorithm. Our method outperforms the PPO-
baseline right from the beginning, reaching PPO’s final
performance after having seen only a little more than half
of the total exploration budget. Under equal exploration
budgets for our method and PPO, we reach almost double
the baseline’s RSS.
IX. Conclusion
We proposed a novel method for solving challenging
POMDPs where a critical challenge is to trade-off belief-
state estimation and reward maximization. We solve these
problems by recursively deploying a neural network as
an approximate posterior into an environment, running
online restless multi-armed bandit inference, and using
the gathered information to update the network weights
for the next rollout. We prove the eﬀiciency of our
approach by evaluating our method in hard beam-tracking
problems across many different environment and network
configurations. Our method has the potential to improve
on existing methods for online RMAB inference in general.
References
M. Giordani, M. Polese, A. Roy, D. Castor, and M. Zorzi,
“A tutorial on beam management for 3gpp nr at
mmwave frequencies,” IEEE Communications Surveys
& Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 183–196, 2018.
Y. Bai, J. Zhang, C. Sun, L. Zhao, H. Li, and X. Wang,
“Ai-based beam management in 3gpp: Optimizing data
collection time window for temporal beam prediction,”
IEEE Open Journal of Vehicular Technology, vol. 5, pp.
48–55, 2024.
L. Maggi, M. Andrews, and R. Koblitz, “To rl or not
to rl? an algorithmic cheat-sheet for ai-based radio
resource management,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2405.19045,
2024. [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.
org/CorpusID:270094919
L.
Maggi,
R.
Koblitz,
Q.
Zhu,
and
M.
Andrews,
“Tracking
the
best
beam
for
a
mobile
user
via
bayesian optimization,” 2023 IEEE 97th Vehicular
Technology Conference (VTC2023-Spring), pp. 1–7,
2023. [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.
org/CorpusID:257833586
I. Aykin, B. Akgun, M. Feng, and M. Krunz, “Mamba:
A multi-armed bandit framework for beam tracking in
millimeter-wave systems,” in IEEE INFOCOM 2020 -
IEEE Conference on Computer Communications, 2020,
pp. 1469–1478.
P. Whittle, “Restless bandits: activity allocation in a
changing world,” Journal of Applied Probability, vol. 25,
no. A, p. 287–298, 1988.
J. C. Gittins, “Bandit processes and dynamic allocation
indices,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series
B (Methodological), vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 148–164, 1979.
[Online]. Available: https://rss.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/abs/10.1111/j.2517-6161.1979.tb01068.x
H. Liu, K. Liu, and Q. Zhao, “Learning in a changing
world:
Restless
multiarmed
bandit
with
unknown
dynamics,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,
vol.
59,
pp.
1902–1916,
2010.
[Online].
Available:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:10127959
T.
Gafni,
M.
Yemini,
and
K.
Cohen,
“Restless
multi-armed bandits under exogenous global markov
process,” ICASSP 2022 - 2022 IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), pp. 5218–5222, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:247158537
R. Meshram, A. Gopalan, and D. Manjunath, “A hidden
markov restless multi-armed bandit model for playout
recommendation systems,” ArXiv, vol. abs/1704.02894,
2017. [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.
org/CorpusID:17484305
R. Meshram, A. Gopalan, D. Manjunath, and I. A.
Gopalan,
“Optimal
recommendation
to
users
that
react: Online learning for a class of pomdps,” 2016
IEEE
55th
Conference
on
Decision
and
Control
(CDC),
pp.
7210–7215,
2016.
[Online].
Available:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:16959266
W.
R.
Thompson,
“On
the
likelihood
that
one
unknown
probability
exceeds
another
in
view
of
the evidence of two samples,” Biometrika, vol. 25,
no.
3/4,
pp.
285–294,
1933.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2332286
Y. H. Jung and A. Tewari, “Regret bounds for thompson
sampling in episodic restless bandit problems,” in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019. [Online].
Available:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
209431191
Y. H. Jung, M. Abeille, and A. Tewari, “Thompson
sampling in non-episodic restless bandits,” ArXiv, vol.
abs/1910.05654, 2019.
V. Raj and S. Kalyani, “Deep reinforcement learning
based blind mmwave mimo beam alignment,” IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. PP, pp.
1–1, 2020.
H. Lee, M. A. Girnyk, and J. Jeong, “Deep reinforcement
learning approach to mimo precoding problem: Optimal-
ity and robustness,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2006.16646, 2020.
G. H. Sim, S. Klos, A. Asadi, A. Klein, and M. Hollick,
“An online context-aware machine learning algorithm
for 5g mmwave vehicular communications,” IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Networking, vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 2487–
2500, 2018.
Codebook‐Based Beamforming Protocols for 5G Millime-
ter Wave Communications, 2018, pp. 275–298.
A. Ichkov, “Beam management and resource allocation
for 5g-and-beyond millimeter-wave cellular networks,”
Ph.D. dissertation, 2025. [Online]. Available: https:
//publications.rwth-aachen.de/record/1008390
D.
Singh,
A.
Shukla,
K.
L.
Hui,
and
M.
Sain,
“Hybrid precoder using stiefel manifold optimization
for mm-wave massive mimo system,” Applied Sciences,
vol.
12,
no.
23,
2022.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/12/23/12282
R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning:
An Introduction, 2nd ed.
The MIT Press, 2018.
[Online]. Available: http://incompleteideas.net/book/
the-book-2nd.html
L.
P.
Kaelbling,
M.
L.
Littman,
and
A.
R.
Cassandra,
“Planning
and
acting
in
partially
observable
stochastic
domains,”
Artificial
Intel-
ligence,
vol.
101,
no.
1,
pp.
99–134,
1998.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S000437029800023X
Q. Zhou, X. Zhang, J. Xu, and B. Liang, “Large-
scale bandit approaches for recommender systems,”
in International Conference on Neural Information
Processing,
2017.
[Online].
Available:
https://api.
semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:39293925
D. Dimmery, E. Bakshy, and J. Sekhon, “Shrinkage
estimators in online experiments,” in Proceedings of
the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, 2019, pp. 2914–
2922.
K.
Ding,
J.
Li,
and
H.
Liu,
“Interactive
anomaly
detection
on
attributed
networks,”
Proceedings
of
the Twelfth ACM International Conference on Web
Search and Data Mining, 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:59528439
A.
Durand,
C.
Achilleos,
D.
Iacovides,
K.
Strati,
G. D. Mitsis, and J. Pineau, “Contextual bandits
for adapting treatment in a mouse model of de
novo
carcinogenesis,”
in
Proceedings
of
the
3rd
Machine
Learning
for
Healthcare
Conference,
ser.
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, F. Doshi-
Velez, J. Fackler, K. Jung, D. Kale, R. Ranganath,
B. Wallace, and J. Wiens, Eds., vol. 85.
PMLR,
17–18
Aug
2018,
pp.
67–82.
[Online].
Available:
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v85/durand18a.html
M. Gagliolo and J. Schmidhuber, “Algorithm selection
as a bandit problem with unbounded losses,” ArXiv,
vol. abs/0807.1494, 2008. [Online]. Available: https:
//api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:8278587
C.
H.
Papadimitriou
and
J.
N.
Tsitsiklis,
“The
complexity
of
optimal
queueing
network
control,”
Proceedings
of
IEEE
9th
Annual
Conference
on
Structure in Complexity Theory, pp. 318–322, 1994.
[Online].
Available:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/
CorpusID:11950868
O.-C. Granmo, “Solving two-armed bernoulli bandit prob-
lems using a bayesian learning automaton,” Interna-
tional Journal of Intelligent Computing and Cybernet-
ics, vol. 3, pp. 207 – 234, 08 2010.
L. Tierney, “Markov Chains for Exploring Posterior Dis-
tributions,” The Annals of Statistics, vol. 22, no. 4, pp.
1701–1728, Dec. 1994.
Q. Liu and D. Wang, “Stein Variational Gradient Descent:
A General Purpose Bayesian Inference Algorithm,” Sep.
2019.
M. D. Hoffman, D. M. Blei, C. Wang, and J. Paisley,
“Stochastic variational inference,” Journal of Machine
Learning Research, vol. 14, no. 40, pp. 1303–1347, 2013.
K. Cho, B. van Merrienboer, D. Bahdanau, and Y. Ben-
gio, “On the properties of neural machine translation:
Encoder–decoder approaches,” in SSST@EMNLP, 2014.
J. Schulman, N. M. O. Heess, T. Weber, and P. Abbeel,
“Gradient
estimation
using
stochastic
computation
graphs,” in NIPS, 2015.
D. Blackwell, “Conditional Expectation and Unbiased
Sequential Estimation,” The Annals of Mathematical
Statistics, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 105 – 110, 1947. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1214/aoms/1177730497
D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization,” CoRR, vol. abs/1412.6980, 2014.
N. Hosseini, M. Khatun, C. Guo, K. Du, O. Ozdemir,
D. W. Matolak, I. Guvenc, and H. Mehrpouyan,
“Attenuation of Several Common Building Materials:
Millimeter-Wave Frequency Bands 28, 73, and 91 GHz,”
vol. 63, no. 6, pp. 40–50, 2021.
S. Jaeckel, L. Raschkowski, K. Börner, and L. Thiele,
“QuaDRiGa: A 3-D Multi-Cell Channel Model With
Time Evolution for Enabling Virtual Field Trials,”
vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 3242–3256, 2014.
D. Tse and P. Viswanath, Fundamentals of Wireless
Communications.
Cambridge University Press, 2005.
J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and
O. Klimov, “Proximal policy optimization algorithms,”
ArXiv, vol. abs/1707.06347, 2017.
A.
Karbasi,
V.
S.
Mirrokni,
and
M.
Shadravan,
“Parallelizing thompson sampling,” in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:235313681
M. Titsias, “Variational learning of inducing variables
in
sparse
gaussian
processes,”
in
Proceedings
of
the
Twelfth
International
Conference
on
Artificial
Intelligence and Statistics, ser. Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, D. van Dyk and M. Welling,
Eds.,
vol.
5.
Hilton
Clearwater
Beach
Resort,
Clearwater
Beach,
Florida
USA:
PMLR,
16–18
Apr 2009, pp. 567–574. [Online]. Available: https:
//proceedings.mlr.press/v5/titsias09a.html
A.
Raﬀin,
A.
Hill,
A.
Gleave,
A.
Kanervisto,
M. Ernestus, and N. Dormann, “Stable-baselines3:
Reliable
reinforcement
learning
implementations,”
Journal
of
Machine
Learning
Research,
vol.
22,
no.
268,
pp.
1–8,
2021.
[Online].
Available:
http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/20-1364.html
J.
Schulman,
S.
Levine,
P.
Abbeel,
M.
I.
Jordan,
and P. Moritz, “Trust region policy optimization,”
ArXiv, vol. abs/1502.05477, 2015. [Online]. Available:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:16046818
T. Chen and C. Guestrin, “Xgboost: A scalable tree
boosting
system,”
Proceedings
of
the
22nd
ACM
SIGKDD
International
Conference
on
Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining, 2016. [Online]. Available:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:4650265
J.
Bergstra,
D.
Yamins,
and
D.
Cox,
“Making
a
science of model search: Hyperparameter optimization
in hundreds of dimensions for vision architectures,”
in Proceedings of the 30th International Conference
on Machine Learning, ser. Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, S. Dasgupta and D. McAllester,
Eds., vol. 28, no. 1.
Atlanta, Georgia, USA: PMLR,
17–19
Jun
2013,
pp.
115–123.
[Online].
Available:
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v28/bergstra13.html
TABLE VII: Oracle based evaluation on Basestation 4
results
low attenuation
high attenuation
5 × 5
9 × 9
11 × 11
5 × 5
9 × 9
11 × 11
Percentage of total RSS
90.47%
66.88%
74.11%
90.73%
68.81%
76.36%
Percentage Call-to-Oracle
1%
5%
49%
1%
4%
53%
Appendix
A. Uncertainty based Oracle evaluation
One of the great benefits of bayesian systems is their
ability to predict their own uncertainty for any prediction.
In the context of beam selection one can exploit this
property by selecting a different algorithm once our
method self-reports high uncertainty. To provide initial
results on this design, we train an XGBoost (Chen and
Guestrin, 2016) model that predicts the likelihood of
being outside the top-5 arms, solely from the amplitude
of the latent noise. To set the hyperparameters, we use
hyperopt (Bergstra et al., 2013) on 5-fold cross-validation
over the existing training trajectories to select for a
maximal f1-score.
Using this XGBoost model, we analyze our meta-
bandit’s ability to measure its own uncertainty on beam
choice quality. We accomplish this by training a classifier
to predict whether the chosen arm is inside the top-5 best
arms, based on the variance of the latent distribution
The results are shown in Fig. 5. One can clearly see
that the model has high uncertainty at the beginning of
exploration, and quickly reduces due to online learning.
This uncertainty management allows for automatic failover
to an e. g., exhaustive beam-sweep in case the predicted
model’s uncertainty rises above a threshold. To maximize
performance, one would have to train our model with this
“escape hatch” already in mind, as calling an external
oracle leads to a distribution shift in our timeseries
estimate of the goal and arm posteriors. We leave a
thorough study of this for future work.
Inspecting our results in Table VII, we observe that
both 5 × 5 and 9 × 9 only rarely calls into the oracle and
overall looses a tiny bit of performance when compared
to the baseline without an oracle. We hypothesize that
this is specifically due to the distribution shift and the
low amount of information gained from the oracle: Both
of these models are already very close to the theoretical
maximum and the information gain in these small beam-id
grids is relatively minimal. Calling into the oracle is most
likely just confusing the model due to the distribution
shift. In the 11 × 11 case, we see significant performance
improvements from having an oracle backup. This makes
sense since getting the “correct” beam yields much more
information than in the smaller grids, and the 11 × 11
configuration is further away from the true optimum.
In general, we argue that such an uncertainty based
prediction model would have to be introduced into the
model training process, for example by adding in an
0
100
200
300
400
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
timesteps
expected uncertainty
Uncertainty of BS4 for size 11 × 11
low attenuation
high attenuation
0
100
200
300
400
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
timesteps
Uncertainty of BS2
5x5 high
5x5 low
9x9 high
9x9 low
11x11 low
11x11 high
Fig. 5: Uncertainty of beam quality over time as measured using our XGBoost model.
additional selection option that provides low reward,
but calls the oracle for increased long-term performance.
However, as can be seen in our 11 × 11 model, even naive
implementations of uncertainty quantification can greatly
boost the final performance. We leave investigations of
more eﬀicient versions of this approach for future works.
