Multi-modal Data Driven Virtual Base Station
Construction for Massive MIMO Beam Alignment
Yijie Bian∗, Wei Guo∗, Jie Yang†‡, Shenghui Song∗,
Jun Zhang∗, Fellow, IEEE, Shi Jin†§, Fellow, IEEE, and Khaled B. Letaief∗, Fellow, IEEE
∗Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering,
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China
†Key Laboratory of Measurement and Control of Complex Systems of Engineering, Ministry of Education,
Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
‡Frontiers Science Center for Mobile Information Communication and Security,
Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
§School of Information Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
Abstract—Massive multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO)
is a key enabler for the high data rates required by the
sixth-generation networks, yet its performance hinges on ef-
fective beam management with low training overhead. This
paper proposes an interpretable framework to tackle beam
alignment in mixed line-of-sight (LoS) and non-line-of-sight
(NLoS) propagation environments. Our approach utilizes multi-
modal data to construct virtual base stations (VBSs), which
are geometrically defined as mirror images of the base station
across reflecting surfaces reconstructed from 3D LiDAR points.
These VBSs provide a sparse and spatial representation of the
dominant features of the wireless environment. Based on the
constructed VBSs, we develop a VBS-assisted beam alignment
scheme comprising coarse channel reconstruction followed by
partial beam training. Numerical results demonstrate that the
proposed method achieves near-optimal performance in terms
of spectral efficiency.
Index Terms—Virtual base station, beam alignment, massive
MIMO, multi-modal data
I. INTRODUCTION
To meet the demand for higher data rates in the sixth-
generation (6G) networks, exploration of spectrum at in-
creasingly elevated frequencies becomes necessary. Higher
frequencies, like millimeter-wave (mmWave), sub-terahertz
(sub-THz), and THz bands, are poised to be cornerstones
of 6G, which will deliver ultra-high bandwidth for massive
data throughput, minimal latency, enhanced connectivity,
and support for advanced applications for both outdoor and
indoor scenarios [1], [2].
To compensate for the high path loss under high frequency,
massive multiple-input-multiple-output (MIMO) antenna ar-
rays are adopted. Given the increasing channel dimension,
channel estimation requires prohibitively high overhead.
Beam training based on a predefined codebook stands out
as a promising approach, as it does not require estimating
the channel explicitly while still achieving comparable per-
formance for beam management. However, beam training
still incurs considerable training overhead when performing
This work was supported in part by the Hong Kong Research Grant
Council under the Area of Excellence (AoE) Scheme Grant No. AoE/E-
601/22-R; and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC)
under Grant 62301156.
exhaustive training [3]. The channel characterized by the
propagation of electromagnetic waves through reflection,
scattering and diffraction, etc., between the base station (BS)
and user equipment (UE) highly depends on the transceiver
locations and the surrounding environment [4]. Thus, a
promising strategy is to incorporate environmental sensing
data, such as light detection and ranging (LiDAR) [5],
radio detection and ranging [6], images from red-green-blue
(RGB) cameras [7], and location data [8], for efficient beam
management.
Existing studies on multi-modal data assisted beam align-
ment mainly focus on line-of-sight (LoS) scenarios. In [9],
the study adopts both 3D LiDAR points and global position-
ing system (GPS) data to assist beam tracking in vehicle-
to-vehicle LoS scenario. Furthermore, the mmWave received
signal strength indicator, RGB image, and GPS data are fused
to assist robust beam tracking in the vehicle-to-infrastructure
LoS scenario [10].
However, LoS based sensors, such as cameras, can perform
poorly in obtaining non-line-of-sight (NLoS) information. A
new insight into the relationship between the environment
and the wireless communication channel is proposed based
on the channel knowledge map (CKM) in [11]. With the
help of localization technologies, the UE’s location can be
used to directly determine the optimal beam pair by looking
up pre-collected measurements [11]. However, CKM-based
methods require a large volume of wireless measurements
and have limited grid resolution. Moreover, they can contain
redundant information since they do not take full advantage
of propagation features of the radio signal. With the increase
of frequency, the propagation paths are more sensitive to
the dynamic environment, which means that certain channels
measured in CKM can have unwanted features that are
difficult to eliminate.
To overcome the limitations of existing methods, we
propose an explicit and interpretable approach that leverages
multi-modal data with global sensing features to construct a
virtual base station (VBS) set for beam alignment, different
from virtual anchor points in [12] which are usually related
to smooth walls for indoor simultaneous localization and
arXiv:2602.22796v1  [cs.IT]  26 Feb 2026
mapping scenarios. The VBSs are defined via the image
principle: for each reflective surface within the LoS coverage
of the physical BS, a corresponding VBS is created as its
mirror image behind that surface. If such VBS is treated
like the physical BS, higher order VBSs with more mirrored
times can be constructed similarly. Each VBS indicates that
there could exist a reflection path, which can be used as a
supplementary communication path when LoS does not exist.
The contributions of the study are summarized as follows,
• We propose a multi-modal assisted VBS construction
method to sparsely represent wireless environment fea-
tures. Preprocessed 3D LiDAR points are meshed to
model complex building facades. Original VBS loca-
tions are computed from the BS position and mesh
parameters. Adjacent VBSs are then clustered to derive
the final VBS set, and their virtual line-of-sight (VLoS)
coverage areas are computed using geometric projection
of reflective meshes.
• Using constructed VBSs and the UE’s location, we
coarsely reconstruct the channel to assign importance
weights to beam pairs for efficient beam training. Coarse
channel parameters, including the absolute value of
channel gain, angle-of-arrival (AoA), angle-of-departure
(AoD) and distance, can be estimated via empirical path
loss models and geometric relations, without using the
3D LiDAR points, reducing computational overhead.
• A partial beam training method with flexible beam
training numbers refines beam pairs for massive MIMO
alignment with low online partial beam training over-
head, evaluated on real-world Openstreetmap (OSM)
and ray-tracing datasets.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
Fig. 1: Illustration of 1-order VBSs with corresponding
coverage areas. With the ground reflection, there are 3 VBSs
in the region. Apart from the shown 2 VBSs in red and
orange, the VBSs with respect to the ground are below the
physical BS and are not shown.
We consider a downlink massive MIMO communication
system, where the BS is equipped with a uniform linear
array (ULA) of NBS transmit antennas, and the UE has
NUE receive antennas. The beamforming vectors are rep-
resented as f ∈CNBS×1 at the BS and w ∈CNUE×1 for
the UE, respectively. For ease of exposition, the BS and
UE are assumed to have one RF chain, the magnitude of
each element in f and w is constant, satisfying |{f}i| =
1/√NBS and |{w}j| = 1/√NUE for i = 1, . . . , NBS
and j = 1, . . . , NUE. In terms of predefined codebook,
due to the massive MIMO under high carrier frequency, a
considerable portion of coverage area is in the near-field.
Thus, we adopt the near-field polar-domain codebook matrix
UBS ∈CNBS×MBS, UUE ∈CNUE×MUE for BS-side and UE-
side, respectively.
The received signal at UE can be expressed as
y =
p
PTwHHfs + wHn,
(1)
where H ∈CNUE×NBS is the channel matrix, PT is the
BS transmit power, s is the signal with normalized power,
and n ∈CNUE×1 denotes the complex Gaussian noise in
bandwidth W with noise power spectrum density N0, i.e.
n ∼CN(0, N0WINUE). The spectral efficiency (SE) can be
calculated as
SE = log2

1 + PT|wHHf|2
N0W

.
(2)
Leveraging the geometric insights from out-of-band multi-
modal data, we can identify a small set of promising prop-
agation paths and their corresponding beam directions. This
effectively prunes the searching space, reducing the problem
to finding the best beam pair within a candidate subset
S with |S| = S << MBSMUE. Within the subset, the
beam alignment objective is to find the optimal beam pair
that can maximize the SE, which is equivalent to find the
largest virtual channel gain |wHHf| with given transmit
power budget. Finally, the beam alignment problem can be
formulated as
max
f, w
|wHHf|
s.t.
f = {UBS}:,bBS
w = {UUE}:,bUE
(bBS, bUE) ∈S,
(3)
where operation {·}:,b means selecting the b-th column of
the matrix, i.e., the b-th codeword in the codebook.
III. VBS-ASSISTED BEAM ALIGNMENT
A. Motivations and Definition
With the higher carrier frequency, the cell coverage size
shrinks, which means that sensing data with a global view of
the cell, such as regional 3D LiDAR data, can be obtained
either by measurement or reconstruction. At the same time,
there exist a few dominant paths, such as the LoS path
and a few reflection paths, while diffraction and scattering
paths become weaker. In [13], the authors proposed to use
a ground reflection path to handle blockage of the LoS
scenario. However, such ground reflection path may not be
stable, which means such path may still have relatively high
path loss since it could penetrate through part of the UE.
This limitation highlights the need for alternative and more
persistent NLoS paths, such as building facades, which can
be used to provide stable reflection paths. To geometrically
model these dominant reflection paths, we introduce the
concept of VBS, which will be detailed in the sequel.
In high frequency bands, such as mmWave and sub-THz,
paths with multiple reflections usually exhibit low channel
gains, which suggests that the contribution of such paths to
the largest virtual channel gains, i.e., the objective function
in problem (3), is typically negligible. Therefore, the single-
reflection path can be considered as the fundamental block
for constructing the VBS. Analogous to a mirror effect, the
reverse extension line of several single reflection paths that
undergo one reflection with respect to a reflective surface can
converge at a certain point. This point is defined as 1-order
VBS, as the associated paths involve only one reflection. For
higher order VBSs, the u-order VBSs are defined as the mir-
ror image of the (u −1)-order VBSs corresponding to paths
with (u −1) reflections. However, unlike indoor scenarios,
where single reflections mostly come from smooth walls,
the outdoor building facades have more complex features,
making the direct identification of VBS considerably more
challenging. To handle this difficulty, multi-modal data, i.e.
regional 3D LiDAR points and BS’s location are used to
construct VBS in an explicit way, which is detailed in the
sequel.
extcolorblack Before proceeding, to formalize the VBS
indexing, we define the following based on reflection condi-
tions. The BS itself is defined as the unique 0-order VBS with
LoS coverage area C0,1. The first 1-order VBSs are defined
as the image of the BS reflected by the ground, indexed
as (1, 1) with VLoS coverage area C1,1. For consistency,
we set C0,1 = C1,1. As illustrated in the example scenario
in Fig. 1, UE 1 lies within the LoS coverage of the 0-
order VBS (the direct LoS path) and VLoS coverage of
three 1-order VBSs (the 1st, 2nd and 3rd), while the blocked
UE 2 is served by only one 1-order VBS (the 2nd). More
generally, the v-th VBS of order u, denoted as VBS (u, v), is
characterized by two key properties: its geographical location
ou,v
VBS and its coverage area Cu,v. It is evident that as the
order u increases, the number of potential VBSs may grow,
but their individual coverage areas typically shrink. This
occurs because the geometric conditions required for multiple
consecutive reflections become significantly more restrictive,
leading to smaller viable service regions.
B. VBS Construction and Storage
In this subsection, we introduce how to construct 1-
order VBSs based on 3D LiDAR points and BS’s location1.
The VBSs construction process mainly includes three steps,
which are geometric information extraction, computation of
VBSs’ locations, and coverage computation and storage, as
shown in Fig. 2.
1Since u > 1 order VBSs construction process is similar with the 1-st
order VBSs, we omit the description of them due to space limitation.
1) Geometric Information Extraction: Recalling that the
VBS definition is the mirror image of BS, the key problem
here reduces to identify the building facades that function
like the mirror. The complete facade of a building object
may not be smooth enough to treat as a mirror, but the
constituent meshes can be seen as independent mirrors. The
process of extracting these meshes begins with the acquisition
of a regional 3D LiDAR point cloud. The LiDAR points
can be obtained by measurement or reconstruction, and are
then preprocessed to remove noise, outliers, moving objects
to preserve the static information of the environment. Next,
objects in the scene can be separated based on the LiDAR
points by hierarchical density-based spatial clustering of
applications with noise (HDBSCAN) algorithm [14]. For
the m-th object, the surface reconstruction [15] and surface
simplification algorithm [16] are applied to generate Nm
triangular meshes set to represent the building object. For the
i-th triangular mesh Ti, the outer normal vector ri ∈R3×1
can be computed based on the three edge vectors ek
i
∈
R3×1, k = 1, 2, 3, where each edge vector can be computed
by the adjacent vertex location vk
i ∈R3×1, k = 1, 2, 3. The
centroid of the triangular mesh is denoted as vc
i ∈R3×1,
which can be computed as vc
i =
1
3
P3
k=1 vk
i . These four
points, together with the outer normal vector, can be used to
geometrically characterize the triangular mesh.
2) Computation of VBSs’ Locations: The computation of
VBSs’ locations is not a simple reflection of the BS location
oBS ∈R3×1 across every triangular mesh in the region,
which would generate a prohibitively large and redundant
set of VBS. Instead, we introduce a systematic selection
process to identify only the valid meshes that can produce
meaningful, physically-realizable reflection paths. We posit
that the i-th triangular mesh is a valid reflector only if
it satisfies both two fundamental geometric conditions, i.e.
orientation condition and unobstructed path condition.
• Orientation Condition: This condition ensures that
the mesh is geometrically oriented towards the BS, a
prerequisite for any reflection. Let pc
i denote the vector
pointing from BS to the centroid of mesh Ti, which is
computed as pc
i = vc
i −oBS. The orientation condition
can be expressed mathematically as
rT
i pc
i > 0,
(4)
which indicates that the angle between ri and pc
i is
less than π
2 , meaning the i-th triangular mesh is facing
towards the BS.
• Unobstructed Path Condition: This condition verifies
that an unobstructed path exists between the BS and
the target mesh Ti. This is crucial because other objects
could occlude the path, making a reflection impossible.
To verify this, we perform a ray-triangle intersection
test. We test rays from the BS to each mesh vertice for
intersections using the M¨oller–Trumbore algorithm [17].
This verification process is implemented by evaluating a
function Inters(vk
i , Tj), which takes the vertex and the
mesh as inputs and returns 1 if an intersection occurs,
Fig. 2: Illustration of the VBS construction process.
or 0 otherwise2. Thus, the unobstructed path condition
can be expressed as
X
j̸=i
Inters(vk
i , Tj) = 0, ∃k ∈{1, 2, 3},
(5)
which indicates that for each i-th triangular mesh, if
there exists a ray which is not blocked by any other
mesh, such mesh is defined as a valid mesh for VBS
computation.
After verifying these two conditions, the location of VBS
indexed by (1, i) is computed as the image of the BS’s
location across the triangular mesh
˜o1,i
VBS = oBS −2diri,
(6)
where di is the distance between the BS and the i-th
triangular mesh. However, there could exist an abundant
number of VBSs of the same order caused by deviation
in the geometric information of LiDAR points. Thus, it is
necessary to reduce the number of VBSs. The locations of
the original VBSs that are spatially close can be clustered
to obtain a sparse representation of the environment. Thus,
HDBSCAN is adopted again for VBS clustering to handle
different densities of the original VBSs. The location of the
v-th clustered 1-order VBS is determined as the centroid
of the cluster, denoted by o1,v
VBS. The triangular meshes
associated with this VBS are obtained by taking the union
of all meshes corresponding to the original VBSs within
the cluster. Higher order VBSs’ locations can be computed
similarly.
3) Coverage Computation and Storage: To compute and
store the coverage area, the entire region is first divided into
Dx × Dy grid points, where the size can be adjusted for
different storage requirements. For the BS’s LoS coverage
area C0,1, we traverse all grid points and determine whether
a LoS path exists between the BS and each grid point by
checking if the connecting line segment is obstructed by any
objects in the environment. For the VLoS coverage area of
VBS indexed by (1, v) where v > 1, the computation process
is as follows. We traverse each grid point within the region
and compute the intersection point between the line segment
connecting the grid point and the VBS location o1,v
VBS with
respect to the triangular meshes associated with this VBS.
Once the intersection point is obtained, we examine the line
segment between this intersection point and the grid point to
determine whether it is obstructed by any other triangular
2Computation details can be found in [17].
meshes using the same method in Section III-B2. If no
obstruction is detected, the grid point is within the VLoS
coverage area C1,v of VBS (1, v).
Remark 1: The main differences between the proposed
VBS principles and existing CKM methods are threefold.
VBS stores only integer VBS indexes and per-grid location
information, rather than the high-precision complex channel
parameters used in CKM [11]. Moreover, VLoS coverage
maps can be reconstructed from acquired LiDAR at arbitrary
precision. Finally, if the BS’s location changes, CKM needs
costly re-measurement whereas VBSs can be recomputed
from existing LiDAR plus the new BS position.
C. VBS-assisted Beam Alignment with Coarse Channel Re-
construction
In beam alignment, the goal is to identify the beam pair
with the largest virtual channel gain. Under the specular
assumption, the estimated pair can be suboptimal, requir-
ing partial beam training for refinement. To reduce search
overhead, different beam pairs are assigned varying prior-
ities through a VBS-assisted coarse channel reconstruction
method. The coarse estimation first computes the potential
AoA, AoD, and distance from the VBS and UE locations, and
then estimates the channel gain using an empirical path loss
model. Notably, 3D LiDAR points are not stored during the
two-stage estimation, as their features are mainly represented
by the VBS set, ensuring low storage cost.
1) Possible AoA, AoD and Distance Computation: Based
on the UE’s location and stored coverage map, the BS can
identify the set of candidate VBSs that serve the UE. The
BS can then proceed to compute the corresponding channel
parameters. To facilitate this computation, we define the
following position vectors. For a VBS indexed by (1, v),
let p1,v
BS = o1,v
ref −oBS and p1,v
UE = o1,v
ref −oUE denote the
displacement vectors from the reflection point with respect
to the VBS indexed by (1, v) to the BS and UE, respectively.
The reflection point is computed as
o1,v
ref = o1,v
VBS +
∥oBS −o1,v
VBS∥2
2

oUE −o1,v
VBS

2

oBS −o1,v
VBS
T 
oUE −o1,v
VBS
.
(7)
For LoS path, the vectors are similarly defined as p0,1
BS =
oUE −oBS and p0,1
UE = oBS −oUE. Let ∆ϕr, ∆ϕt denote the
inherent antenna array azimuth angle offsets at the UE and
BS, respectively, and ∆ψr, ∆ψt denote the inherent antenna
array elevation angle offsets at the UE and BS, respectively.
We can compute the channel parameters corresponding to
the VBS indexed by (u, v), i.e., azimuth/elevation AoA,
AoD ˆϕr
u,v, ˆϕt
u,v, ˆψr
u,v, ˆψt
u,v, and the two segment distances
ˆrr
u,v, ˆrt
u,v as follows.
• For
VLoS
paths:
ˆϕr
1,v
=
arctan

{p1,v
UE}2
{p1,v
UE}1

+
∆ϕr,
ˆϕt
1,v
=
arctan

{p1,v
BS }2
{p1,v
BS }1

+ ∆ϕt,
ˆψr
1,v
=
arccos

{p1,v
UE}3
∥p1,v
UE∥2

+ ∆ψr, ˆψt
1,v = arccos

{p1,v
BS }3
∥p1,v
BS ∥2

+
∆ψt, ˆrr
1,v = ∥p1,v
UE∥2, ˆrt
1,v = ∥p1,v
BS∥2.
• For LoS path: ˆϕr
0,1 = arctan

{p0,1
UE}2
{p0,1
UE}1

+∆ϕr, ˆϕt
0,1 =
arctan

{p0,1
BS }2
{p0,1
BS }1

+ ∆ϕt, ˆψr
0,1 = arccos

{p0,1
UE}3
∥p0,1
UE∥2

+
∆ψr, ˆψt
0,1 = arccos

{p0,1
BS }3
∥p0,1
BS ∥2

+ ∆ψt, ˆrr
0,1 = ˆrt
0,1 =
∥p0,1
BS∥2.
2) Path Loss Computation: The path loss estimation can
be divided into two parts, the free space path loss and
reflection path loss. Diffraction loss is neglected since it has
hardly no contribution to the stable wireless communication.
The free space path loss can be computed as
PLfree(fc, d) = 20 log10
4πfc
c

+ 20 log10(d),
(8)
where fc is the carrier frequency, c is the speed of light, λ
is the wavelength, and d is the path distance. The u times
reflection path loss can be estimated as
PLref(fc, d, u, Γ) = PLfree(fc, d) + Γ[dB] + 10 log10 u,
(9)
where Γ is a predefined reflection coefficient since the
material properties are unknown.
For VBS indexed by (u, v), there exists a path with u
times reflections, the channel gain can be estimated as ˆβu,v =
10
 −PLu,v
20

, where PLu,v is computed as (10), shown at the
top of the next page. With the azimuth/elevation AoA, AoD,
and segment distances, the coarse channel between BS and
UE can be reconstructed based on the geometric model as
ˆH =
√
NBSNUE
X
(u,v)∈VUE
ˆβu,v×
a( ˆψr
u,v, ˆϕr
u,v, ˆrr
u,v; NUE)a( ˆψt
u,v, ˆϕt
u,v, ˆrt
u,v; NBS)H,
(11)
where VUE denotes the VBS set serving the UE, which
can be obtained by first mapping the UE’s location to the
K nearest grid points (ix, iy), and then taking the union
of the VBS sets corresponding to each of these K grid
points. a( ˆψr
u,v, ˆϕr
u,v, ˆrr
u,v; NUE) and a( ˆψt
u,v, ˆϕt
u,v, ˆrt
u,v; NBS)
are UE-side and BS-side steering vectors, respectively. The
steering vector of near-field ULA with N elements and
carrier frequency fc is
a(ψ, ϕ, r; N) =
1
√
N
h
ejkc(r(0)−r), . . . , ejkc(r(N−1)−r)iT
, (12)
where kc = 2πfc
c
is wave number, c is speed of light, and
r(n) is distance between n-th antenna and scatter, defined as
r(n) =
p
r2 + (δnd)2 −2r sin ψ sin ϕδnd. δn = n −N−1
2
is array-centered normalized antenna index, d is antenna
spacing, r is distance between scatter and array.
TABLE I: Scenario-dependent dataset configuration.
Parameter
Value
Carrier Frequency fc
40 GHz
Bandwidth W
500 MHz
BS Position oBS
[140, 60, 4] m
UE’s height hUE
1.5 m
Transmit Power PT
40 dBm
Noise Power Spectrum Density N0
-174 dBm/Hz
Predefined Reflection Coefficient Γ
10
K for Grid Neighborhood
3
VBS Grid Number Dx, Dy
40, 40
Predefined codebook serves as transformation matrix to get
polar domain beamspace representation G = |UH
UE ˆHUBS|.
Top-S beam pair indexes with the largest virtual channel
gains form searching subset S. Partial beam training based
on S yields optimal beam pair (b⋆
BS, b⋆
UE) with maximum
virtual channel gain.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Simulation Setup
In this section, we evaluate the SE performance of beam
alignment with the proposed VBS technique. The simulation
is conducted in a 3D environment with the help of Blender
and Sionna [18]. Blender is used to import the OSM in
a specific region in Mexia, Texas with about 120 m ×
120 m (31.6802◦-31.6823◦N, −96.4826◦- −96.4787◦W),
and generate simulation 3D LiDAR points, while Sionna
is used to simulate the ray-tracing based wireless channels.
To simulate the LiDAR measurement and process error, the
standard deviation and drop rate are set to 5 cm and 5%.
We consider a sub-THz fully-analog massive MIMO system
with configuration in Table I.
B. Results and Discussion
We compare the performance of VBS-assisted beam align-
ment (VBS-BA) with location based beam alignment (Loc-
BA) [11] and refined CKM-based beam alignment (RCKM-
BA). When S = 1, the RCKM-BA degrades into a method
called training-free beam alignment in [11]. The grid number
for storing the first 4 strongest channel paths parameters is
40 × 40. The optimal line means choosing the best beam
pair to maximize the virtual channel gain by exhaustive beam
training.
As shown in Fig. 3, under the NBS = 256, NUE = 16
configurations, the Loc-BA performs much worse than VBS-
BA and RCKM-BA, because it is only based on the LoS path.
The coarse reconstructed channel only based on location data
cannot capture dominant NLoS paths. VBS-BA has a little
performance degradation compared to the optimum. Such
acceptable gap is caused by neglect of coherence stack, errors
in coverage area computation and measurement errors in 3D
LiDAR data. If partial beam training number is less than 5,
VBS-BA can surpass up to 0.5 bps/Hz compared to RCKM-
BA due to the limited resolution of CKM measurement.
From Table II, with different antenna configuration, VBS-
PLu,v = 1(u = 0)PLfree(fc, ∥p0,1
BS∥2) + (1 −1(u = 0))PLref(fc, ∥p1,v
UE∥2 + ∥p1,v
BS∥2, 1, Γ),
(10)
Fig. 3: SE performance versus Top-S partial beam training
number under the NBS = 256, NUE = 16 configuration.
TABLE II: SE performance versus different antenna config-
uration with Top-5 partial beam training.
Antennas for
BS and UE
SE (bps/Hz)
Loc-BA
VBS-BA
RCKM-BA
Optimal
(256, 16)
25.60
29.56
29.24
30.00
(256, 32)
25.51
30.00
29.69
30.48
(512, 8)
25.57
29.08
28.69
29.85
(512, 16)
25.58
29.63
29.15
30.36
BA always achieves the best performance compared to Loc-
BA and RCKM-BA with Top-5 partial beam training. To get
the optimal solution, the exhaustive beam training overhead
should reach 896×20, 896×51, 2412×8, 2412×20 based on
the near-field beam codebook in [19], respectively. As shown
in Fig. 3 and Table II, for VBS-BA, only training Top-5 beam
pairs achieves about 98% SE with little performance loss, and
training more beam pairs only brings incremental increase in
SE.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a VBS construction technique
to represent the main features of the wireless environment
with regional 3D LiDAR points and location data. The VBSs
can be used to assist partial beam training by coarse chan-
nel reconstruction with arbitrary resolution. The estimated
absolute value of the channel gain is based on LoS and 1-
order specular reflection under empirical models, denoting
the importance of each path for subsequent effective partial
beam training. Simulation results based on a real-world
map and ray-tracing based channel demonstrated that VBS-
assisted beam alignment achieves about 98% performance of
the optimal result by training only Top-5 beams.
REFERENCES
[1] K. B. Letaief, W. Chen, Y. Shi, J. Zhang, and Y.-J. A. Zhang, “The
roadmap to 6G: AI empowered wireless networks,” IEEE Commun.
Mag., vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 84–90, Aug. 2019.
[2] P. Zhang, M. F. De Guzman, X. Li, X. Cai, K. Haneda, N. Tervo,
A. P¨arssinen, F. Tufvesson, and P. Ky¨osti, “Understanding subtera-
hertz radio channels: The impact of beamforming on wireless system
design,” IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 2–10, Mar. 2025.
[3] M. Giordani, M. Polese, A. Roy, D. Castor, and M. Zorzi, “A tutorial
on beam management for 3GPP NR at mmwave frequencies,” IEEE
Commun. Surv. Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 173–196, 1st Quart. 2019.
[4] Y. Feng, C. Zhao, F. Gao, Y. Zhang, and S. Ma, “Environment sensing-
aided beam prediction with transfer learning for smart factory,” IEEE
Trans. on Wireless Commun., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 676–690, Jan. 2025.
[5] S. Jiang, G. Charan, and A. Alkhateeb, “LiDAR aided future beam
prediction in real-world millimeter wave V2I communications,” IEEE
Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 212–216, Feb. 2023.
[6] U. Demirhan and A. Alkhateeb, “Radar aided 6G beam prediction:
Deep learning algorithms and real-world demonstration,” in Proc.
IEEE Wirel. Commun. Netw. Conf. (WCNC), Austin, TX, USA, Apr.
2022, pp. 2655–2660.
[7] G. Charan, M. Alrabeiah, T. Osman, and A. Alkhateeb, “Camera
based mmwave beam prediction: Towards multi-candidate real-world
scenarios,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 74, no. 4, pp. 5897–5913,
Apr. 2025.
[8] J. Morais, A. Bchboodi, H. Pezeshki, and A. Alkhateeb, “Position-
aided beam prediction in the real world: How useful GPS locations
actually are?” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Rome, Italy,
May 2023, pp. 1824–1829.
[9] Y. Bian, J. Yang, S. Xia, and S. Jin, “3-D LiDAR and GPS aided
beam tracking in millimeter wave vehicular communications,” IEEE
Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 13, no. 12, pp. 3290–3294, Dec. 2024.
[10] Y.
Bian,
J.
Yang,
L.
Dai,
X.
Lin,
X.
Cheng,
H.
Que,
L.
Liang,
and
S.
Jin,
“Multi-modal
fusion
for
sensing-
aided
beam
tracking
in
mmwave
communications,”
Phys.
Commun., vol. 67, p. 102514, Dec. 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1874490724002325
[11] D. Wu, Y. Zeng, S. Jin, and R. Zhang, “Environment-aware and
training-free beam alignment for mmwave massive MIMO via channel
knowledge map,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. Workshops (ICC
Workshops), Montreal, QC, Canada, Jun. 2021, pp. 1–7.
[12] J. Yang, C.-K. Wen, and S. Jin, “Hybrid active and passive sensing
for SLAM in wireless communication systems,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun., vol. 40, pp. 2146–2163, Mar. 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:247242281
[13] S. Ganji, J. Kim, R. Sonigra, and P. R. Kumar, “Terra: Beam manage-
ment for outdoor mm-wave networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 15 112–15 124, Oct. 2024.
[14] R. J. G. B. Campello, D. Moulavi, A. Zimek, and J. Sander,
“Hierarchical density estimates for data clustering, visualization, and
outlier detection,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data, vol. 10, no. 1,
Jul. 2015. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2733381
[15] H. Edelsbrunner and E. P. M¨ucke, “Three-dimensional alpha shapes,”
ACM Trans. Graph., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 43–72, Jan. 1994. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/174462.156635
[16] M. Garland and P. S. Heckbert, “Surface simplification using quadric
error metrics,” in Proc. Annu. Conf. Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech.
(SIGGRAPH), Los Angeles, CA, USA, Aug. 1997, pp. 209–216.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/258734.258849
[17] T. M¨oller and B. Trumbore, “Fast, minimum storage ray-triangle
intersection,” J. Graphics, GPU, & Game Tools, vol. 2, pp. 21–28,
Aug. 1997.
[18] J. Hoydis, S. Cammerer, F. A. Aoudia, A. Vem, N. Binder,
G. Marcus, and A. Keller, “Sionna: An open-source library for
next-generation physical layer research,” 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.11854
[19] M. Cui and L. Dai, “Channel estimation for extremely large-scale
MIMO: Far-field or near-field?” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 70, no. 4,
pp. 2663–2677, Apr. 2022.
