1
Rethinking Beam Management: Generalization Limits
Under Hardware Heterogeneity
Nikita Zeulin, Olga Galinina, Ibrahim Kilinc, Sergey Andreev, and Robert W. Heath Jr.
Abstract—Hardware heterogeneity across diverse user devices
poses new challenges for beam-based communication in 5G and
beyond. This heterogeneity limits the applicability of machine
learning (ML)-based algorithms. This article highlights the
critical need to treat hardware heterogeneity as a first-class
design concern in ML-aided beam management. We analyze
key failure modes in the presence of heterogeneity and present
case studies demonstrating their performance impact. Finally,
we discuss potential strategies to improve generalization in beam
management.
I. INTRODUCTION
The diversity of user devices in 5G cellular networks and
beyond creates a fundamental challenge for multiple-input
multiple-output (MIMO) communication. Beam management
becomes harder to scale in high-frequency bands such as the
7–24 GHz range (FR3) expected in 6G. To accelerate beam
management procedures, ML-based approaches can leverage
past data and side information, such as position, orientation,
LIDAR measurements, or images. A major limitation of most
prior ML-related work is the assumption of homogeneity in
deployment scenarios. Analogous to the classic ML risk of
training and testing on similar data distributions, in beam
management, training and testing on scenarios with only
a single type of base station (BS), user, and environment
may lead to overfitting and poor generalization to real-world
deployments [1].
Beam-based communication systems are profoundly het-
erogeneous. By heterogeneity, we here refer to the presence
of multiple diverse configurations, discrete as the number of
antenna elements or continuous as the antenna orientation
or location. This heterogeneity arises from multiple sources,
including (i) hardware-driven diversity, e.g., of antenna array
size, orientation, and configuration, (ii) device-level constraints
such as varied memory and computational resources, and
(iii) environmental diversity ranging from multi-path rich
urban canyons to rural line-of-sight (LOS) scenarios, and
others. Taken together, these heterogeneity dimensions create
a combinatorial explosion of configurations.
A fundamental issue is to determine the fine line between
performance losses caused by inefficient application of ML
models (e.g., in feature selection or unrepresentative training
data) and failures that reflect their inherent limitations in han-
dling heterogeneity. Models often assume a fixed input-output
structure tailored to a fixed BS configuration, user equipment
(UE) type, and propagation environment. As a result, they
Nikita Zeulin, Olga Galinina, and Sergey Andreev are with Tampere
University, Tampere, Finland (emails: name.lastname@tuni.fi).
Ibrahim Kilinc and Robert W. Heath Jr. are with University of California
San Diego, CA, USA (emails: {ikilinc, rwheathjr}@ucsd.edu).
fail to generalize well when applied to new environments.
Domain shift, where the input distribution between training
and testing changes (e.g., due to rural/urban environments),
represents only one dimension of a broader generalization
problem. Practical systems often encounter concept drifts,
where the underlying input-output relationship changes (e.g.,
due to different codebooks) and out-of-distribution (OOD)
inputs (e.g., with previously unseen hardware configurations).
As a result, many ML-based beam management approaches
perform well in controlled homogeneous simulation settings
but require separate models for each realistic configuration,
which may become impractical to scale.
While some academic work acknowledges domain shift, it
still remains unclear whether unsuccessful generalization in
wireless systems stems primarily from poor methodological
choices or happens due to deeper theoretical barriers. In this
article, we argue for recognizing heterogeneity as a central and
under-addressed barrier to the practical deployment of ML-
based beam management. We analyze the key dimensions of
heterogeneity in highly directional beam management, includ-
ing variation in antenna configuration, codebooks, propagation
environment, and user device capabilities. Our contributions
are threefold: we (i) introduce a taxonomy of heterogeneity
dimensions and discuss their effect on ML-assisted beam
management, (ii) present empirical case studies that demon-
strate their impact on the system-level generalization, and (iii)
suggest research directions that enable heterogeneity-aware
design in practical beam management systems.
II. DATA-DRIVEN BEAM MANAGEMENT IN 5G/B5G
Beam management is the task of establishing and main-
taining directional links between the UE and base station
(BS) through beam sweeping, measurement, selection, and
reporting.
A. Beam Management Procedures in 5G NR
In 5G NR, beamforming configuration selection procedures
are implementation-specific and not explicitly defined by the
standard beyond timing and signaling constraints. Practical
implementations typically consist of three stages.
First, the BS performs coarse beam sweeping. The BS
transmits a set of reference signals using codebooks that
typically cover the entire angular space. This procedure is
integrated with the initial access via transmissions of synchro-
nization signal blocks (SSBs). SSB signals are broadcasted
periodically and can be subsequently measured for maintaining
synchronization, beam management, and mobility.
arXiv:2602.18151v1  [cs.NI]  20 Feb 2026
2
Fig. 1. Illustration of heterogeneity types in data-driven beam management.
Further, the BS initiates CSI-RS-based beam refinement.
The BS refines its transmit beam using channel state in-
formation reference signals (CSI-RSs) and a narrower-beam
codebook focused around the previously selected SSB beam.
In contrast to SSB, CSI-RS transmissions can be scheduled
periodically or aperiodically.
Finally, the UE may perform additional beam refinement.
The UE refines its transmit beam by transmitting sounding
reference signals (SRS) scheduled by the BS, periodically or
aperiodically. The BS uses a preconfigured receive beam or
sweeps over several beams.
Beamforming configuration selection is not limited to initial
access and can be re-triggered if the UE connectivity quality
(for example, estimated block error rate) is lower than the
configured threshold [2], e.g., in the case of handover or beam
recovery [3]. For large beam search spaces typical for large-
scale antenna arrays, beam management can induce high beam
management overheads, which can be especially critical for
dynamic scenarios with short beam coherence intervals. This
motivates the use of data-driven methods that may help reduce
the signaling overhead by predicting the best configuration.
B. ML Approaches for Beamforming Configuration
The data-driven methods commonly rely on machine learn-
ing (ML) algorithms to infer the best beamformer (constructed
or selected from a predefined codebook) based on the history
of previous measurements or simulations. Supervised learning
and reinforcement learning (RL) are the most widely applied
types of ML algorithms for data-driven beamforming. Both
of them allow optimizing the beamforming configuration se-
lection procedure based on indicators, such as reported CSI,
measured RSRP, or previously selected beams.
Supervised learning relies on labeled data that can be
collected either from real networks directly or from simula-
tion environments. While traditionally, supervised algorithms
assume offline training, the methods can also be adapted to
online settings using incremental learning algorithms. Such
models can deliver high predictive performance, but they often
require fine-tuning to adapt to new data.
In contrast, RL methods optimize decision policies via
interaction with the environment. The environment provides
a direct feedback in the form of a reward, such as throughput
or signal quality. RL-based algorithms are often pretrained
offline and then deployed in the network as a fixed policy
to avoid radio resource-intensive onsite policy optimization.
Similar to supervised solutions, these methods can be pre-
trained in a virtual environment and further refined on on-site
measurements, if QoS requirements allow online exploration.
C. Enhancing Model Generalization
To improve model generalization, the community relies on
two key strategies: fine-tuning on new data and training on
diverse datasets [4], [5]. Fine-tuning relies on retraining the
model on a small portion of device- or environment-specific
data that was underrepresented or absent in the training dataset.
In practice, fine-tuning can last several minutes [5] or much
longer, depending on the volume of test data and available
computing resources [6]. During this period, the device may
need to fall back on the conventional beam selection proce-
dures. An alternative approach is to pre-train models on a
mixture of data drawn from diverse measurement or simulation
scenarios, which can reduce fine-tuning overheads.
Both strategies have practical limitations. On-device fine-
tuning can be infeasible for resource-constrained devices due
to limited compute and battery capabilities. Even if possible,
slow retraining may result in a model outdated w.r.t. new
conditions. Mixed data training may suffer from a limited
number of configurations (e.g., antenna geometries, codebook
sizes, environments) available for training.
To avoid on-device fine-tuning, environment- and device-
specific models can be pulled from the site-specific model
catalog (e.g., during handover). Such a register, however may
only contain models for the most popular devices. Addition-
ally, in practice, models trained for specific devices or environ-
ments may underperform relative to matched conditions when
hardware, software, or deployment conditions deviate from
training assumptions. Consequently, generalization cannot be
ensured by model selection alone and requires performance
monitoring and fallback mechanisms. These limitations high-
light that relying only on model engineering is not sufficient
to ensure robustness across diverse scenarios.
D. Input Feature Space and Contextual Information
The choice of input features plays a key role in the resulting
performance of ML-based methods. Most models typically
rely on physical layer measurements such as RSRP values
3
collected from SSB and/or CSI-RS corresponding to a subset
of beams or a full codebook. The measurements are often
passed into a neural network-based model trained for classi-
fication (e.g., beam index prediction), regression (e.g., RSRP
prediction), or RL. To enhance the performance, physical-layer
measurements can be complemented with the side information,
including GNSS-based locations, IMU sensor-based orienta-
tion, and information from LIDARs, cameras, or other sources.
Simpler types of side information, such as location or
orientation, are often treated as-is and either passed as ad-
ditional features into the model or combined with beam
measurements [7]. High-dimensional inputs, such as images
or LIDAR clouds, are preprocessed with deep encoders to
generate more compact and representative features. These
features are subsequently concatenated with the main inputs
(e.g., beam RSRPs) or, alternatively, can be used as a context.
While deep learning architectures successfully infer com-
plex input-output dependencies for image, audio, or text data,
their effectiveness in beamforming configuration selection
tasks can be limited in the case of low-dimensional input.
Moreover, these architectures implicitly encode hardware con-
figurations and environment and therefore struggle to gener-
alize [8], [9]. This limitation is not only an implementation
choice, but it reflects a fundamental coupling between com-
monly used features and deployment-specific parameters that
cannot be fully removed by increasing model complexity.
E. Target Performance Metrics
Model performance strongly depends on the choice of
model architecture and richness of the input data. Even for
well-designed models, however, selecting suitable evaluation
criteria remains a key issue. Poorly chosen performance met-
rics may lead to inadequate choice of models. For beamform-
ing configuration selection, traditional computer vision metrics
(e.g., Top-1 accuracy) can be misleading as they ignore the
resulting link-quality variation. Evaluation should instead use
wireless-specific metrics such as spectral efficiency, through-
put, or RSRP gap.
A commonly used metric is the accuracy score, which can
be interpreted as the frequency of selecting the strongest beam
or pair of beams. Accuracy is suitable only for classification
tasks, where there is only one correct label, and misclassifica-
tion events should be minimized. Applied to beam prediction,
the accuracy score only makes sense in environments with only
one dominant transmission direction, which often corresponds
to LOS. In this case, however, it may be possible to reduce
the beam search to several candidate beams or even compute
the beamformers straightforwardly without any ML if the co-
ordinates of BS and UE are known. Scatter-rich environments,
meanwhile, can have multiple arrival directions with similar
path gains. Therefore, selecting a slightly weaker transmission
direction may not affect the system-level performance, making
accuracy less informative.
To avoid misinterpretations, one should prioritize wireless-
specific performance indicators, such as throughput, spectral
efficiency, or the difference between RSRP of predicted and
strongest beam directions, over traditional computer vision
metrics. Deployed models should also be continuously as-
sessed for in-field performance drift caused by changes in
traffic load, propagation conditions, or hardware configura-
tion. This can be done using a combination of system-level
KPIs (e.g., throughput, BLER) and intermediate indicators
(e.g., RSRP gap between predicted and measured beams or
prediction confidence).
Wireless-specific metrics can depend on the simulation
setup, such as the sizes of antenna arrays, the number of
antenna panels, propagation, mobility patterns, or user density
and interference. This could be resolved by standardizing
simulation settings and introducing benchmark evaluation sce-
narios, which is an open challenge in the field.
III. TOWARD HETEROGENEITY-AWARE BEAM
PREDICTION
Strong model generalization capabilities are essential for
improving robustness of beam predictors to different hetero-
geneity types. In this section, we outline practical considera-
tions for enhancing the resilience of beam prediction methods
to heterogeneity arising from antenna geometry, codebook de-
sign, deployment environment, and computational constraints.
A. Enhancing Beam Prediction with Domain Knowledge
The key strategy for improving the robustness of ML-
based methods to hardware and environment heterogeneity
is the use of wireless-specific feature representations. Prior
works on generalization in beam prediction demonstrated that
conventional input features such as beam RSRP are implicitly
coupled with different antenna geometries, codebooks, or
propagation environments and therefore lack adaptability to
new configurations and deployments [10]. This highlights
the need for selecting features that remain invariant across
hardware variations.
One can employ domain-specific feature representations that
are minimally coupled with device- or site-specific param-
eters and therefore exhibit better consistency across diverse
setups. The examples of such representations are beamspace
representation [5], power-angular spectrum [11], and angular-
delay profile [12], which project the channel features into
the angular domain. These representations are agnostic to the
antenna size and shape and, therefore, can transfer effectively
between different configurations.
Another promising approach is to use physics-informed
models [10] that can explicitly learn underlying channel pa-
rameters, e.g., path attenuation, angle-of-arrival, and delay co-
efficients from shooting-and-bouncing ray tracing simulations.
Such models offer good generalization but remain computa-
tionally demanding and require accurate physical models of
each deployment. These approaches highlight the importance
of aligning learned representations with the underlying phys-
ical structure of the wireless channel.
B. Antenna Geometry Mismatch
Cellular networks typically host a diverse set of devices,
including smartphones, vehicles, drones, and other platforms
4
with distinct hardware configurations. This results in substan-
tial heterogeneity in antenna configurations, including differ-
ences in array geometry (e.g., UPA, ULA), number of elements
and active ports, panel count, and deployment orientation.
While beam prediction models trained for particular antenna
configurations can perform well under matched conditions,
even small changes in test configurations may cause perfor-
mance degradation. New antenna geometries or configurations
can therefore lead to significant generalization difficulties, as
demonstrated in previous works [8], [13].
For example, if a beam predictor relies solely on partial
RSRP reports for a fixed set of beams, its performance is
likely to degrade when applied to previously unseen antenna
configurations or associated codebooks.
C. Impact of Codebook Design
The 5G NR codebook design is not specified by the stan-
dard, except for CSI reporting. As a result, BSs and UEs
can employ a wide range of codebooks, ranging from 3GPP-
specified CSI reporting codebooks to site-specific or ML-
generated ones. These codebooks may differ in both structure
and size (e.g., oversampling factor), beamwidth, and angular
coverage, which makes it critical to design beam prediction
solutions that can generalize to previously unseen codebooks.
From the perspective of ML-based beam prediction, changes
in codebook design directly affect discretization of the an-
gular domain and mapping of physical directions into beam
indices. Predictors that operate on beam indices or other
codebook-dependent measurements implicitly assume a fixed
structure. When the codebook changes, this correspondence
and learned correlations may no longer hold, even if the
underlying antenna hardware and propagation environment
remain unchanged. This effect is particularly pronounced for
predictors trained on sparse codebooks, where neighboring
beam indices may not represent similar spatial regions after
the codebook changes. Consequently, robustness to codebook
diversity requires feature representations that are decoupled
from specific beam indexing and instead reflect the underlying
channel.
D. Environmental Diversity
Beam prediction models are commonly trained on measure-
ments that implicitly depend on site-specific parameters, such
as the location of reflectors, blockages, and surrounding geom-
etry. As a result, trained models may overfit to environment-
specific patterns, especially when aided by side information
such as location or RSRP measurements. Consequently, when
a model is deployed in a previously unseen environment, the
UE may experience significant performance degradation due
to a mismatch between learned dependencies and the new
propagation conditions.
To mitigate this issue, one option is to locally fine-tune the
model using site-specific measurements collected by the UE.
This requires sufficient computational and energy resources,
which may only be available for highly capable devices, such
as autonomous vehicles. Alternatively, the network may store
multiple pre-trained models for different environments and
transfer a suitable model version to the UE as it enters a
new site. Such environment-specific personalization introduces
additional challenges, including transmission overheads, de-
pending on model size, and increased storage and maintenance
requirements at the network side, particularly when UE beam
predictors are not device-agnostic. These challenges highlight
the importance of explicitly accounting for environmental het-
erogeneity when designing robust ML-based beam prediction
solutions.
E. Differences in Computational Capabilities
Beyond representational robustness, practical deployment
of ML-based beam prediction is further constrained by het-
erogeneous computational capabilities across UE devices. UE
devices differ in form factor and range from constrained
smartphones to high-end platforms like autonomous vehicles
with on-board GPUs. While advanced devices can run deep
neural models, many UEs cannot support their compute and
memory demands. If left unaddressed, this issue may lead to
uneven access to ML-based solutions, especially for resource-
limited UEs. In addition, running deep learning-based models
can induce increased compute and, therefore, energy use
compared to conventional beam management procedures. As
these procedures are substituted with their ML counterparts,
repeated inference from a resource-intensive model can lead
to rapid battery depletion.
Another critical concern is the inference latency. The in-
ference time should be consistent with hard timings of beam
management protocols. As pointed out in [5], the channel es-
timation and CSI feedback procedures typically take 5 - 20 ms.
It is, however, generally difficult to develop a neural network-
based architecture for site-specific codebook design with 5 ms
inference time and 24 GB VRAM [5]. While tolerable for BS,
these constraints can be infeasible for UEs, most of which are
often smartphones with compute- and memory-limited SoCs
(system-on-chips). In addition, high computational complexity
limits the capabilities for on-device retraining. The ability to
perform device personalization varies, and some devices may
lack even basic support for model updates. The efficiency
of retraining is especially important, as UE may end up
staying in a fallback, non-ML regime for data collection.
In dynamic scenarios, prolonged retraining can result in an
outdated model.
IV. CASE STUDY: ML-AIDED BEAM ALIGNMENT
This section presents a numerical illustration of the effects
of antenna, codebook, and environment heterogeneity on ML-
aided beam selection.
A. Modeling Setup and Algorithms
The case study uses an urban vehicular scenario with
multiple mobile UEs equipped with uniform planar arrays
(UPAs) in both LOS and NLOS conditions (see Fig. 2). The
BS is mounted at a height of 15 m and equipped with an
8×8 UPA and performs analog beamforming in a narrowband
single-user MIMO setup. The UEs are heterogeneous and can
5
SUMO snapshot
Base station
Vehicles
Fig. 2. 3D layout of simulation scenario and SUMO snapshot.
be equipped with UPAs of different sizes, employ different
codebooks, or reside in different locations. All UE antennas
are configured such that the broad side faces upward, which
models the deployment on a vehicle where the array is parallel
to the ceiling. We select a carrier frequency of 15 GHz, 24
subcarriers, and 30 kHz subcarrier spacing. Beam selection at
both ends is performed using analog beamforming codebooks.
In the considered scenario, the BS always predicts the best
beam, thus focusing on the UE-side beam prediction and
isolating generalization effects at the receiver. The transmit
power is 20 dBm, and the receiver noise figure is 10 dB. To
reflect realistic city dynamics, mobility is modeled in the
Eclipse SUMO simulator with a mixed urban traffic pattern
including both cars and buses (3:7 ratio) at the average speed
of 9.5 m/s).
To
evaluate
beam
prediction
performance,
we
adapt
a ResNet-based deep neural network (DNN) architecture
from [8], [9]. The DNN predicts received signal power along
a beam direction (BD) represented by the mean azimuth
and elevation. As non-ML baselines, we select (i) two-level
hierarchical search (HS) and (ii) exhaustive search (ES), where
overheads affect the resulting performance. In all experiments,
we measure the relative average spectral efficiency (SE) drop
w.r.t. the performance of a genie-based algorithm (i.e., 0%
corresponds to the exact genie performance). This metric
directly reflects the system-level impact of beam misprediction
discussed in Section III. To provide more insight into the
distribution of relative SE drop, we also estimate the 90%-
quantile to show where 90% of measurements fall.
B. Diversity of Antenna Configurations
We illustrate the impact of antenna configuration diversity
on the relative SE divergence w.r.t. the genie-based beam
selection in Fig. 3(a). In this experiment, the UEs train the
DNN-based beam predictor on a 4 × 4 (“train”) UPA config-
uration and evaluate it on an 8 × 8 (“test”) configuration. For
both configurations, UEs adopt DFT codebooks with antenna-
dependent sizes of 16 and 64 beams for 4×4 and 8×8 UPA,
respectively. The color code (blue/orange/green) corresponds
to the beam selection methods (DNN-based/HS/ES). For each
method, we provide a 90th percentile of the SE drop to
demonstrate the worst-case performance in 90% of cases.
Lower percentiles indicate more consistent performance. Non-
ML baselines demonstrate stable behavior, and the distribution
is concentrated closely around the mean value. Therefore, the
measured empirical percentiles coincide with the mean in the
plots.
The DNN-based algorithm shows comparable mean SE
divergence when transitioning from 4 × 4 to 8 × 8 UPA.
The variance, however, increases significantly. The high 90th
percentile suggests that 90% of the measurements can suffer
more than 50% SE reduction compared to the genie-based
solution. This behavior suggests that ML-based beam predic-
tors trained on a fixed antenna configuration may offer limited
robustness when deployed on larger arrays and become less
preferable than the conventional non-ML-based beam selection
algorithms.
C. Codebook Type Heterogeneity
To study this effect, we select UEs equipped with 4×4 UPAs
and construct two distinct codebooks by randomly sampling
16 beamformers from a ×4 oversampled DFT codebook. The
model is trained on one codebook and evaluated on the other.
The results in Fig. 3(b) show the generalization performance
of the BD-based method when transferring to a new codebook.
The high divergence of the DNN-based predictor indicates
that this method does not achieve robust, codebook-agnostic
prediction, as reflected in both the average and 90-percentile
performance. Although BD-based regression in general is
inherently flexible to new codebooks, these results suggest that
using beam direction alone may be insufficient to bridge the
domain gap introduced by changes in the codebook design.
D. Diversity of Environments
We illustrate the effect of environmental diversity through
an experiment in which the simulation environment is divided
into four spatial quadrants. In this set of experiments, we
compare beam predictors trained on the measurements for 8×8
UPA. The train location includes one upper-right quadrant,
while the test location includes the other three quadrants.
The results shown in Fig. 3(c) indicate a notable drop in SE
when the test quadrant is not seen during training. While the
performance difference between the ML-based and non-ML-
based (ES/HS) changes less dramatically than in the previous
scenario, a noticeable degradation of the DNN-based approach
is still observed in the “test” setup.
The presented results demonstrate that ML-aided beam
selection perform well under matched training and deployment
conditions, but its generalization degrades in the presence of
antenna, codebook, and environmental heterogeneity. These
effects are also reflected in increased variability and worst-case
behavior, which are critical factors for reliable system-level
design. These observations indicate that under device hetero-
geneity, robustness cannot be achieved solely through exten-
sive model tuning or increased training data. Instead, there is
6
(a) Antenna array heterogeneity.
(b) Codebook heterogeneity.
(c) Location heterogeneity.
Fig. 3.
Demonstration of performance drop under different UE heterogeneity types. The bars indicate the sample mean of the SE drop relative to the
genie-based SE (thus, in %), and the 90th percentile illustrates the variation in the distribution of the relative SE values. In the “train” setup, the DNN-based
beam predictor (blue) always performs on par or better than two-level HS (orange) and ES (green). Under heterogeneous “test” conditions, however, the
DNN-based predictor exhibits pronounced performance degradation and high variability, particularly under codebook and location heterogeneity.
a clear need for the development of learning approaches that
explicitly account for physical structure, deployment diversity,
and practical constraints. Building on these observations, we
outline several promising future directions below.
V. FUTURE DIRECTIONS AND DISCUSSION
The identified failure modes motivate several research di-
rections beyond increasing model complexity and data corpus.
A. Lightweight Learning for Regularization
One of the solutions to address both distributional mismatch
and computational heterogeneity discussed in Section III-E is
to rely on simpler models that may act as implicit regularizers
in heterogeneous deployments. For example, SVM offers an-
alytically rigorous generalization guarantees and can robustly
learn from a very limited number of samples [14]. Combined
with carefully crafted system-aware input, simple models such
as SVMs or even decision trees can outperform overparameter-
ized deep architectures relying on raw inputs. Such models are
particularly attractive for resource-constrained devices, where
training or fine-tuning deep models is infeasible. Incremen-
tal implementations of SVM also support fast adaptation in
dynamic environments.
Computational heterogeneity can also be addressed by
decreasing inference complexity with well-established tech-
niques, such as model quantization, distillation, or pruning.
Although these techniques do not resolve distributional mis-
match, they primarily help reduce deployment barriers. Quanti-
zation compresses model weights into lower-precision formats,
which allows reducing computation at the cost of potential
numerical instability or reduced retraining flexibility for on-
device retraining. Distillation transfers knowledge from a large
“teacher” model to a smaller “student” model, which helps
improve inference latency and memory usage. Yet, distilled
models can lose their performance when fine-tuned due to their
smaller capacity, which may render them fragile in dynamic or
highly diverse deployments. Further, pruning removes model
weights with marginal contribution to overall performance, but
if aggressive, it may degrade accuracy or require additional
retraining.
B. Collaborative Learning for Knowledge Exchange
Distributional mismatch across devices motivates the need
to exchange information about beam-channel relationships
and, therefore, the use of collaborative learning techniques.
While federated learning (FL) enables collaborative model
update without sharing raw data, it does not inherently resolve
the domain shift caused by diversity, and in the presence
of heterogeneity, can even lead to performance degradation
if local data distributions are highly non-IID. Model-level
personalization allows each device to maintain a shared global
model and a personalized component. The shared component
captures features universal for the majority of devices or
environments, while the personalized part adapts to device-
or environment-specific properties.
Furthermore, diversity of sensors results in different types
of side information, which further complicate collaboration.
Devices equipped with sensors with rich contextual inputs
(e.g., LIDAR) generate updates that are not directly trans-
ferable to devices that rely only on low-dimensional inputs
such as location or orientation. This can be resolved by
combining devices into groups according to the device-specific
data and hardware profiles and training models within such
groups, which may become costly. Another challenge is to
mitigate the effect of so-called stragglers (i.e., devices with
weak compute powers violating timing constraints). Straggler-
aware strategies, such as asynchronous updates, sampling, or
resilient aggregation techniques, can improve timing alignment
of compute-limited devices. Overall, collaborative learning,
carefully crafted beyond simple gradient averaging, can reduce
the need for local adaptation.
C. Adaptive Learning
Resilience to dynamic conditions and deployment drift
requires the design of adaptation mechanisms compatible with
the operational constraints of beam management (e.g., latency,
energy, etc.). Adaptation should be lightweight and driven by
system performance indicators. One such form of adaptation
for a constant beam-channel structure is continual learning.
Continual learning enables models to incrementally adapt
to new conditions, such as changes in mobility patterns or
environments, without retraining from scratch [15]. At the
7
same time, while ML models can be adapted to environment
dynamics, in the presence of structural changes (e.g., codebook
mismatch), na¨ıve continual updates may fail to adjust to new
conditions.
Active learning, where devices can be specifically requested
to provide labeled data when confidence degrades, provides
an additional adaptation mechanism. This may correspond
to requesting expanded beam sweeps or higher-resolution
measurements in specific conditions. While such strategies can
improve efficiency, they need to be carefully designed to avoid
excessive signaling overhead or operation disruptions.
Summarizing, these observations indicate that while part of
the generalization challenge arises from how ML is applied,
others may reflect deeper structural limitations imposed by
hardware or sensing diversity. Such limitations cannot be
reliably resolved through more complex models and data
alone. Recognizing these and designing accordingly represents
the key research direction for ML-aided beam management.
Future work should focus on developing theoretical tools to
characterize the ability for generalization under heterogeneity
and on establishing standardized benchmarks for correspond-
ing evaluations.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Akrout, A. Feriani, F. Bellili, A. Mezghani, and E. Hossain, “Domain
generalization in machine learning models for wireless communications:
Concepts, state-of-the-art, and open issues,” IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 3014–3037, 2023.
[2] Y. Heng, J. G. Andrews, J. Mo, V. Va, A. Ali, B. L. Ng, and J. C. Zhang,
“Six key challenges for beam management in 5.5G and 6G systems,”
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 74–79, 2021.
[3] Y. Heng, Y. Zhang, A. Alkhateeb, and J. G. Andrews, “Site-specific
beam alignment in 6G via deep learning,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 62, no. 8, pp. 162–168, 2024.
[4] “Study on artificial intelligence (AI) / machine learning (ML) for NR air
interface,” 3GPP Technical Report TR 38.843 V18.0.0, 3rd Generation
Partnership Project (3GPP), Dec. 2023. (Release 18).
[5] R. M. Dreifuerst and R. W. Heath, “Machine learning codebook design
for initial access and CSI Type-II feedback in sub-6-GHz 5G NR,” IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 6411–
6424, 2024.
[6] Z. Xu, S. Wang, and Y.-J. Angela Zhang, “Scenario-adaptive meta-
learning for mmWave beam alignment,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 3192–3208, 2025.
[7] A. Ali, J. Mo, B. L. Ng, V. Va, and J. C. Zhang, “Orientation-assisted
beam management for beyond 5G systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
pp. 51832–51846, 2021.
[8] N. Jayaweera, A. Bonfante, M. Schamberger, A. M. A. Tehrani, T. San-
guanpuak, P. Tilak, K. Jayasinghe, F. W. Vook, and N. Rajatheva,
“5G-Advanced AI/ML beam management: Performance evaluation with
integrated ML models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.15326, 2024.
[9] Nokia, “Evaluation of ML for beam management.” 3GPP TSG RAN
WG1 #114, R1-2307240, 2023.
[10] E. Zhu, H. Sun, and M. Ji, “Physics-informed generalizable wireless
channel modeling with segmentation and deep learning: Fundamen-
tals, methodologies, and challenges,” IEEE Wireless Communications,
vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 170–177, 2024.
[11] I. Kilinc, N. Deshpande, and R. W. Heath, “Position-aided beam man-
agement for multi-panel dynamic metasurface antennas,” in 2024 58th
Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems, and Computers, pp. 1673–
1677, IEEE, 2024.
[12] K. Vuckovic, M. B. Mashhadi, F. Hejazi, N. Rahnavard, and A. Alkha-
teeb, “PARAMOUNT: Toward generalizable deep learning for mmWave
beam selection using sub-6 GHz channel measurements,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Wireless Communications, vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 5187–5202,
2024.
[13] O. Mashaal, E. Mohammed, A. Digby, L. Swersky, A. Eshaghbeigi,
and H. Abou-Zeid, “Protobeam: Generalizing deep beam prediction to
unseen antennas using prototypical networks,” in GLOBECOM 2024-
2024 IEEE Global Communications Conference, pp. 133–138, IEEE,
2024.
[14] Q. Hua, M. H. Nielsen, Z. An, J. Ren, R. Wisniewski, S. Kold,
O. Rahbek, and M. Shen, “Lab to multiscene generalization for non-
line-of-sight identification with small-scale datasets,” IEEE Transactions
on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 516–529, 2023.
[15] M. A. Mohsin, M. Umer, A. Bilal, M. A. Jamshed, and J. M. Cioffi,
“Continual learning for wireless channel prediction,” in ICML 2025
Workshop on Machine Learning for Wireless Communication and Net-
works, pp. 1–16, 2025.
Nikita Zeulin is a Doctoral Researcher currently pursuing a doctoral degree
with Tampere University, Finland. He received his B.Sc. degree from St.
Petersburg State University of Aerospace Instrumentation, Russia, and his
M.Sc. degree from Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Russia.
His research interests include federated learning and machine learning en-
hancements for wireless communications.
Olga Galinina is an Institute of Advanced Study Senior Research Fellow at
Tampere University, Finland. She received her B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees from
the Department of Applied Mathematics, St. Petersburg State Polytechnical
University of Peter the First, and her Ph.D. degree from Tampere University
of Technology. Her research interests include applied mathematical modeling
and analysis of wireless networks and statistical machine learning.
Ibrahim Kilinc is a Ph.D. student at the University of California, San Diego.
He received his B.S. in Electrical and Electronics Engineering and his minor
degree in Information Systems and Technologies from Bilkent University,
Ankara, Turkey, in 2023. His research interests include sensor-aided beam
alignment in heterogeneous devices in wireless systems and signal processing.
Sergey Andreev received the Ph.D. degree from Tampere University of
Technology, and the Cand.Sc., and Dr.Habil. degrees from SUAI. He is a
Professor of Wireless Communications and formerly an Academy Research
Fellow with Tampere University, Finland. He is also a Research Specialist
with Brno University of Technology, Czech Republic. He co-authored more
than 300 published research works on intelligent IoT, mobile communications,
and heterogeneous networking.
Robert W. Heath Jr. is the Charles Lee Powell Chair in Wireless Communi-
cation in the Department of ECE at the University of California, San Diego. He
has received several awards including the 2019 IEEE Kiyo Tomiyasu Award,
the 2020 North Carolina State University Innovator of the Year Award, and the
2021 IEEE Vehicular Technology Society James Evans Avant Garde Award.
He is a licensed Amateur Radio Operator, a registered Professional Engineer
in Texas, a Private Pilot, a Fellow of the National Academy of Inventors, a
Fellow of the IEEE, and a Fellow of the AAAS.
