Robust Federated Learning for Wireless Networks:
A Demonstration with Channel Estimation
Zexin Fang∗, Bin Han∗, and Hans D. Schotten∗†
∗University of Kaiserslautern (RPTU), Germany
†German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI), Germany
Abstract—Federated learning (FL) offers a privacy-preserving
collaborative approach for training models in wireless networks,
with channel estimation emerging as a promising application.
Despite extensive studies on FL-empowered channel estimation,
the security concerns associated with FL require meticulous
attention. In a scenario where small base stations (SBSs) serve
as local models trained on cached data, and a macro base
station (MBS) functions as the global model setting, an attacker
can exploit the vulnerability of FL, launching attacks with
various adversarial attacks or deployment tactics. In this paper,
we analyze such vulnerabilities, corresponding solutions were
brought forth, and validated through simulation.
Index Terms—Federated learning, incremental learning, chan-
nel estimation, adversarial attack, data poisoning.
I. INTRODUCTION
Federated learning (FL) empowers devices to collectively
train a global model without sharing raw data, a crucial
aspect for maintaining user data confidentiality in wireless
networks [1]. On-device computing units, such as TrueNorth
and Snapdragon neural processors, further enable FL with the
necessary hardware solutions [2]. Retaining data at its origin
and employing on-device learning enable swift responses to
real-time events in latency-sensitive applications. FL is recog-
nized as a promising enhancement for wireless networks in
various aspects, such as resource allocation [3], [4] as well
as beamforming design [5]. On the other hand, the global
shift towards higher frequencies, attributed to their abundant
spectrum resources, will raise new challenges. For instance,
compared to sub-6GHz systems, millimeter-wave (mmWave)
systems face a more complex environment, characterized by
higher scattering, penetration losses, and path loss for fixed
transmitter and receiver gain [6]. Especially, due to signif-
icantly shorter channel coherent time, conventional channel
estimation techniques become impractical. Machine learning
(ML) based channel estimation techniques have demonstrated
their effectiveness in improving estimation performance, as
well as reducing the estimation time [7].
Given the inherent high dynamics of high-frequency radio
channels, which can exhibit diverse characteristics across
varying weather conditions, timely model updates based on
real-time data are crucial. With FL, the model can undergo
rapid updates without substantial communication overhead.
Meanwhile, the training will be carried out parallel, further
reducing the update time. While compelling, many recent
studies involve training local models with edge devices, fol-
lowed by the base station receiving and aggregating model
updates to update the global model [6], [8], [9]. On-device
training reduces communication overhead, yet synchronizing
diverse edge devices on large-scale, particularly on resource-
constrained mobile user (MU), poses a significant challenge.
Thus, effort have been made towards small base station (SBS)
level training, with the SBSs training on a small dataset cached
from nearby MUs, and the model aggregation is performed
on a macro base station (MBS) [10], [11]. This FL strategy
aims to provide more reliable and timely model updates. Most
recently, research focus have been shifted to scenarios where
both base station (BS) and edge devices are capable of training
local models, and the aggregation is performed on the BS [12],
[13].
Threats of FL-based channel estimation can be categorized
in two aspects: i) malicious local models providing malicious
model updates ii) data from poisoned sources. In BS-based
training, compromising a BS into a malicious local model is
unlikely, yet the security concern persists with the vulnerability
to poisoned data sources. However, there is still overlap
between security concern of those frameworks. In instances
of data poisoning, an attacker may deploy a substantial set of
malicious MU to execute data poisoning attacks on a specific
BS. In such scenarios, the impact is akin to involving a
malicious local model.
In this work we consider data poisoning attacks on SBS.
The attacks may launch widely, or target in one specific
SBS, mirroring scenarios involving malicious local models.
Firstly, we evaluate the vulnerability to adversarial attacks on
channel estimation models. Secondly, we propose novel aggre-
gation functions leveraging Bayesian Model Ensemble (BME),
which ensures resilience against attacks without compromising
estimation performance. Thirdly, we employ a pre-filtering
strategy based on local loss distribution to mitigate attacks
that are widely launched. Our simulation results highlight the
effectiveness of our methods in mitigating diverse attacks,
surpassing conventional approaches, and offering insights to
bolster the security and resilience of FL in wireless commu-
nication.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. Channel estimation model
ML-based models are trained with algorithms to learn
underlying patterns and correlations in data, subsequently
arXiv:2404.03088v2  [cs.LG]  30 Jul 2024
enabling them to predict patterns in new data. The channel
estimation model h can be described as follows,
y = h(x, w) : Pm×n →Cm×n,
(1)
where x represents the input pilot signal, x takes the form of
a matrix Pm×n. The output y signifies the estimation result of
the channel estimation model, with Cm×n denoting the pre-
dicted Channel state information (CSI) matrix. The parameter
w corresponds to the weights of the channel estimation model.
By integrating FL, we can refine the model by fine-tuning
it using cached datasets, denoted as B = {Bt
n : 1 ≤n ≤
N, 1 ≤t ≤T}, where n represents the number of SBS and t
denotes the federation round. At each federation round, local
models undergo K steps of stochastic gradient descend (SGD),
defined by the update rule:
wn ←wn −ηk∇ℓ(Bk, wn),
(2)
where wn is the model weights for each local model, and ℓ
is the loss function. ηk and Bk denote the step size and mini-
batch at kth step, respectively, with Bk ∈Bt
n.
B. Robust model aggregation
Following the fine-tuning of the local model, the weight
updates, denoted as W = {wt
n : 1 ≤n ≤N, 1 ≤t ≤T},
are aggregated to create a new global model with weight wt
g.
The standard aggregation function, FedAvg, can be described
as follows:
wt
g =
N
X
n=1
ln
P(L)wt
n,
(3)
where L = {ln | n = 1, . . . , N} denotes the cached dataset
length at the n local model. Considering FedAvg’s sensitivity
to corrupted weights, robust aggregation function (RAF) is
designed by exploring alternatives to the mean [14]. Common
approaches for robust aggregation are exemplified here:
• Trimmed Mean: In this approach, a parameter a <
N
2
is chosen. Subsequently, the server eliminates the lowest
a values and the highest a values and then computed
from the remaining N −2a values, L is then modified as
La = {ln | 1 ≤n ≤N −2a}, with
wt
g =
N−2a
X
n=1
ln
P(La)wt
n.
(4)
• FedMedian: Instead of averaging weights, FedMedian
utilizes a median computation,
wt
g = med(wt
1, · · · , wt
N).
(5)
Through the use of RAFs, the global model effectively filters
out potential malicious model updates. As demonstrated in
[15], the Trimmed Mean method requires awareness of attacks,
more specifically, the count of local models under attack,
and its effectiveness varies across different attack modes. On
the other hand, the FedMedian excels in resilience against
various attacks. Despite these strengths, RAFs generally have
a drawback: the potential to discard usefull model updates,
which leads to inferior convergence performance compared to
FedAvg. To address this limitation, Campos et al. proposed a
dynamic framework, that alternates between FedAvg and RAFs
for a better convergence than simply employing RAFs [14].
III. THREAT MODEL
In the above described channel estimation scenario, we
contemplate the presence of a certain number J of adversary
entities (AEs). These AEs strategically launching attacks on
one or several SBSs. The objective is to manipulate the global
model through the aggregation process. Launching attacks
on all SBSs demands significant resources. However, with
the advent of unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) as potential
attack platforms, the feasibility of attacks on the majority
or entirety of SBSs can’t be ignored. Considering that the
model transmission is exclusively between SBS and MBS,
the use of dedicated links can effectively mitigate man-in-
the-middle (MITM) attacks in the SBSs level. This attack can
be done through the deployment of malicious MUs or MITM
attack agents between the MUs and the SBSs. We consider
the following attack modes:
1) Outdate mode: AEs provide random outdated CSI with-
out any modification. In the case of MITM attack, the attack
agent is required to store the outdated CSI and send back to
SBS.
2) Collusion mode: AEs will provide the same CSI. This
attack mode is designed to manipulate the model, potentially
leading to model collapse, as well as to produce a desired out-
putted CSI. This attack mode doesn’t require any knowledge
of CSI from the MITM attack agent.
3) Reverse mode: AEs will provide reversed version of the
CSI, each value of CSI will be reversed regarding the mean.
This attack mode requires the MITM attack agent to possess
precise knowledge of the CSI and perform an additional
processing step.
Given the channel estimation model is fine-tuned with
dataset Bt
n = {(xα, yα) | 1 ≤α ≤A} . The object is to
minimize the loss ℓ(yα, ˆyα), where ˆyα is the predicted output
corresponding to xα. A common choice for the loss function
is the Mean Squared Error (MSE), defined as:
MSE = 1
A
A
X
α=1
(ˆyα −yα)2
= 1
A
A
X
α=1
(wxα −yα)2.
(6)
And the average gradient with respect to the loss function and
weight is given by:
▽wℓ= −η 1
A
A
X
α=1
∂
∂w(wxα −yα)2
= −2η 1
A
A
X
α=1
xα(wxα −yα).
(7)
Referring to Eq. (7), if the dataset exhibits a large variety,
the effectiveness of collusion mode, capable of injecting
malicious gradients towards specific y, is likely to weaken. In
comparison, reversing a subset of yα can effectively interfere
with, or negate the useful gradient regardless of the dataset
variety. The modified subset cached by the SBS can be
described as
˙Bt
n = {( ˙xβ, ˙yβ) | 1 ≤β ≤B}, where
˙yβ
represents the modified CSI through different attack modes.
And ¯Bt
n = {(¯xγ, ¯yγ) | 1 ≤γ ≤Γ} represents the authentic
subset.
IV. METHODOLOGY
A. Robust aggregation function: StoMedian
The BME framework implements Bayesian inference on
the server, thereby mitigating potential degradation in model
performance [16]. Essentially, BME has the capacity to dy-
namically aggregate local models. In the scope of BME-based
FL, chen et al. firstly employs client parameters to construct a
stochastic filter for the aggregation of each federation round.
While showcasing superior accuracy compared to FedAvg,
Chen’s approach, FedBE, relies on utilizing a diagonal Gaus-
sian distribution for the stochastic filter, with [17]
µ =
X
n
ln
P(L)wn,
(8)
Σdiag = diag
 X
n
ln
P(L)(wn −µ)2

.
(9)
Given the sum set of all cached dataset B, p(w|B) is posterior
distribution of w being learned. The output probability of w
can be denoted as p(y|x; w), and integrating the outputs of all
possible model:
p(y|x; B) =
Z
p(y|x; w)p(w|B) dw.
(10)
BME with S samples can be described:
p(y|x; B) ≈1
S
S
X
s=1
p(y|x; w(s)),
(11)
{w(s) ∼N(µ, Σdiag)}S
s=1.
(12)
Building upon this approach, it can be seamlessly integrated
into robust aggregation techniques, ensuring system resilience
without compromising convergence performance across feder-
ation rounds. However, it’s worth noting that weights in ML
models are typically normalized to approach 0, making origi-
nal approach insensitive when encountering various adversarial
attacks. Hence, integrating BME into our proposed aggregation
function, StoMedian, introduces two significant enhancements
geared towards improving sensitivity to adversarial attacks:
i) The stochastic filter was constructed using the logarithm of
weights to ensure high sensitivity. ii) Rather than employing
µ, we utilized the median of weights to mitigate the potential
impact of invaded local models. The aggregation function is
then presented in Alg. 1.
Fig. 1: CDF of actual samples and truncated Gaussian distri-
bution
Algorithm 1: StoMedian
1 Input: the length of cached dataset L with respect to the SBS ; a small value
ϵ being added to the weights to avoid logarithm of zero.
2 Output: global model weight of current model update: wg.
3 Function StoMedian :
4
get all weights {wn,j | 1 ≤n ≤N; 1 ≤j ≤J} from agents;
5
initialize {pn,j | n = 1, . . . , N; j = 1, . . . , J} ;
6
wj = {wn,j | 1 ≤n ≤N}; pj = {pn,j | 1 ≤n ≤N}
7
wn = {wn,j | 1 ≤j ≤J}; pn = {pn,j | 1 ≤j ≤J}
8
for each wn,j do
9
if wn,j > 0 then
10
w◦
n,j = −log(wn,j + ϵ)
11
else if wn,j ≤0 then
12
w◦
n,j = log |wn,j −ϵ|
13
end
14
end
15
for j = 1 : J do
16
w◦
j = {w◦
n,j | n = 1, . . . , N};
17
µj = med(w◦
j );
18
σj = std(w◦
j );
19
σj = max(σj, ϵ);
20
for n = 1 : N do
21
pn,j =
1
σj
√
2π e
−
(w◦
n,j −µj )2
2σ2
j
22
end
23
pj =
pj ⊙L
P(pj ⊙L)
24
end
25
wg = P
n
pn ⊙wn
26 end
Algorithm 2: Local loss pre-filtering (LLPF)
1 Input: cached dataset Bn with respect to the SBS; variance modifier index
kσ; determination threshold θ
2 Output: modified Bn.
3 Function LLPF :
4
initialize Bt and But to put trustworthy or untrustworthy data;
5
get E = {ℓα | α = 1, . . . , A} using global model;
6
µ = med(E)
7
Construct Φtg with µ, kσ
8
for α = 1 : A do
9
if Φtg(ℓα) > θ then
10
include (xα, yα) in Bt
11
else if Φtg(ℓα) ≤θ then
12
include (xα, yα) in But
13
end
14
end
15
L1 = |But|; L2 = |Bt|
16
for each (xl1, yl1) ∈But do
17
r ∼U(1, L2)
18
replace (xl1, yl1) with (xr, yr) ∈Bt
19
end
20
Bn = But ∪Bt
21 end
B. Local loss pre-filtering
In response to potential attacks employing a widely
launched strategy, where most or all local models may be
impacted, a common approach is to filter the anomalies before
training. Given that the global model has been pre-trained
and undergoes fine-tuning during each federation round for
enhanced performance, it can be utilized to identify anomalies.
In a departure from the conventional use of local intrinsic
dimensionality (LID) for data discrimination, we propose
an alternative approach to evaluate the reliability of data
originating from each MU. The loss of each sample, E =
{ℓα | 1 ≤α ≤A}, where ℓα = (ˆyα −yα)2, is computed.
The distribution of ℓα heavily relies on the current model
and is not mathematically traceable. Therefore, we evaluate it
numerically with 300 randomly generated samples on a pre-
trained model. Further details on the training setting, model
specifications, and data description are provided in Section
V. As depicted in Fig. 1, the cumulative distribution function
(CDF) of ℓα can be accessed with CDF of a truncated Gaussian
distribution with lower and upper bounds of [0, +∞), with
Φtg(x) = 1
2 + 1
2 · erf
kσµ
√
2 (x −µ)

,
(13)
µ =
A
X
α=1
ℓα.
(14)
where kσ = 0.6, which is determined empirically. Similar to
the approach introduced in [18], by assigning a threshold θ
to Φtg, it is capable of detecting anomalies. Further details of
the algorithm can be found in Alg. 2.
V. EVALUATION
A. Model and datasets
In this work, we employ a simple Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) for channel estimation, comprising: i) an input
layer (5 × 5 kernel size, 24 filters) with SeLU activation,
ii) a hidden layer (5 × 5 kernel size, 8 filters) with Softplus
activation, iii) an output layer (5 × 5 kernel size, 1 filter)
with SeLU activation. This CNN processes input data of size
612×14×1 and has demonstrated effective channel estimation
performance, as evidenced by [19].
The datasets used for training channel estimation mod-
els were generated using a reference example titled ”Deep
Learning Data Synthesis for 5G Channel Estimation,” acces-
sible within the MATLAB 5G Toolbox, with specific settings
considered. Given that pilot signals and CSI are typically
represented as complex numbers, we adopted a preprocessing
step. Specifically, we divided the complex data into its real
and imaginary components to make it compatible with CNN.
This approach aligns with prior work.
B. Threat evaluation
The global model was initially pre-trained with a small
dataset including 200 samples. Subsequently, local models
were fine-tuned with Bt
n, Bt
n = ˙Bt
n ∪¯Bt
n. A validation dataset
B◦= {(x◦
δ, y◦
δ) | 1 ≤δ ≤∆}, was employed to assess the
channel estimation performance, with these data never being
part of the training.
To demonstrate the susceptibility of FL, we simulated our
SBSs under data poisoning attacks, alongside a CL scenario
as comparison. The standard FedAvg aggregation function
was used. We define MSE(γ) = MSE(¯yγ, ˆyγ) as an indi-
cator of the model’s performance on seen data, MSE(δ) =
MSE(y◦
δ, ˆyδ) as an indicator of its performance on unseen
data, and MSE(β) = MSE( ˙yβ, ˆyβ) as a measure of the
efficacy of adversarial manipulations on the model.
We considered a minimum cached dataset length required
for training. In cases where the SBS lacks sufficient data, a
subset of pre-training data is appended to meet the minimum
requirement. AEs can be deployed either in a widespread
strategy or to target a specific SBS. The simulation setup is
described in Tab I.
TABLE I: Simulation setup 1
Parameter
Value
Remark
U
1000
Number of MUs
N
10
Number of SBSs
System
Mb
1
Number of MBS
K
10
Number of model update rounds
ra
0% ∼50%
Ratio of AEs
Imin
200
Minimum length of cached datasets
required for training
P(L)
2000
Length of all cached datasets of
one federation round
ln
ln ∼U(170, 230)
Length of a local cached dataset
(without targeted attacks)
∆
200
Length of validation dataset
lr
0.001
Learning rate for adam optimizer
m
0.9
Momentum for adam optimizer
E
100
Epochs of the training
Training
Nbatch
64
Batch size
As analyzed in Section III, the reverse mode can nullify
useful gradients learned from authentic data, a phenomenon
whose effectiveness is confirmed by our simulation results
in Figs. 2a–2c. Conversely, the outdate mode has minimal
impact, only slightly degrading model accuracy, due to the
strong correlation between outdated CSI and actual CSI. Com-
bining Fig. 2a and Fig. 2b, FL shows significant performance
degradation under collusion attacks compared to CL. This is
attributed to the fact that FL trains local models on a small
dataset, characterized by a limited diversity.
Fig. 2c demonstrates the vulnerability of FL to targeted
data poisoning attacks on specific clients. For reverse attack,
at 30%, intersections between MSE(β) and either MSE(γ) or
MSE(δ) become evident. This signifies the successful evasion
of the attacker, making the attacks undetectable by the ML
model itself. Meanwhile, the intersections of collusion attack
appear at 50%. Both attack modes are significantly boosted
because FedAvg employs a weighted approach. This results in
the victim local model, surrounded by AEs, being assigned
a larger weight, further degrading model performance during
aggregation. However, the efficacy of such attack strategies
can be efficiently mitigated by employing RAFs.
(a) Attack evaluation of centralized learning (CL)
(b) FL during widely launched attacks
(c) FL during targeted attacks
Fig. 2: Threat evaluation
(a) Convergence results without attacks
(b) Convergence results while under attacks
Fig. 3: Convergence test of RAF
C. Evaluation of proposed methodology: StoMedian
While AEs are being deployed to target a specific SBS,
which is a cost-efficient and most impactful attack strategy
from attacker side. To demonstrate the effectiveness of RAFs,
we conducted simulations to illustrate the convergence of
MSE(δ) across 20 federation rounds for four different aggrega-
tion functions. The simulation setup is same as listed in Tab I,
with only reverse attack being considered and ra = 20%.
Firstly, we examine a scenario devoid of any attacks,
depicted in Fig.3a. Unsurprisingly, FedMedian demonstrates
the poorest convergence performance, as we elucidated in
Sec.II-B. StoMedian and FedBE demonstrated significantly
superior performance compared to FedAvg, primarily due to
its effectiveness in preventing model drift in the aggregation.
As the overall performance improved over federation rounds,
the performance gap became less evident, with all three
aggregation function reaching a comparable convergence level.
Meanwhile, FedBE performed slightly better than StoMedian.
Nevertheless, the performance of StoMedian is contingent
upon the distribution of underlying local datasets. In the
worst-case scenario where local data are highly non-identically
distributed, which is unlikely in our setting where SBSs
have confined coverage and are not likely to exhibit diverse
geographical deployments. StoMedian may filter out most
local weights, resulting in convergence levels similar to that of
FedMedian. In such a scenario, the performance degradation
of FedAvg is inevitable.
The results of convergence analysis of aggregation func-
tions under attacks are depicted in Fig.3b. FedAvg exhibited
no defense against attacks, and FedBE demonstrated limited
defense but far from resilient. The performance gap between
FedBE and FedMedian is larger than that of Fig.3a, due
to the scaling which may not be immediately evident. In
contrast, FedMedian and StoMedian demonstrated resilient and
comparable performance against coordinated strategy. On the
other hand, all aggregation functions failed to mitigate widely
launched attacks effectively.
D. Evaluation of proposed methodology: LLPF
Having evaluated the effectiveness of StoMedian, we now
proceed to assess the efficacy of LLPF. The simulation setup
remains consistent with the parameters outlined in Table I,
with StoMedian being applied. We examine three attack
modes, with ra set at 20%.
We compared the simulation results with two baselines, ob-
tained by excluding 20% of the authentic data. The results de-
picted in Fig.4 indicate that employing LLPF leads to a slight
improvement in convergence performance. When comparing
the reverse mode and collusion mode in Fig. 4a, the attack
performance of collusion mode exhibits high fluctuations. This
observation aligns with our analysis in Sec.III, confirming that
the performance of collusion attacks strongly depends on the
variety of data.
In Fig. 4b, LLPF exhibited robust performance against all
attack modes, with performance levels roughly converging to
±1 of baseline2. However, considering a certain level of miss-
detection is inevitable, this prevents the convergence perfor-
mance with LLPF from reaching the level of baseline1. In
(a) Convergence results without LLPF under 3 attack modes during
widely launched attacks
(b) Convergence results with LLPF (θ = 0.95 kσ = 0.6) under 3
attack modes during widely launched attacks
Fig. 4: Convergence test of LLPF
summary, LLPF effectively mitigate widely launched attacks
as well as improve the overall performance.
VI. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
This work has demonstrated the vulnerability of FL when
applied in wireless communication, illustrated through a chan-
nel estimation scenario. Various adversarial attacks and strate-
gies were devised to exploit this vulnerability. Subsequently,
StoMedian was introduced to enhance resilience during the
aggregation process, along with LLPF tailored for incremental
training for channel estimation. Both StoMedian and LLPF
have been validated through simulation.
However, the performance of the mentioned methods may
be impacted when the cached data exhibit highly non-identical
distributions, a factor not addressed in our paper. Particularly
for LLPF, in scenarios with non-identical or highly varied
data, it may filter out new features for the model to learn.
To address this, a soft determination process based on the
cumulative trustworthiness of MUs, as exemplified in [20],
could be applied. By integrating the current determination with
the MU’s historical behaviors, a smart determination process
could further enhance model convergence.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported partly by the German Federal
Ministry of Education and Research within the project
Open6GHub (16KISK003K/16KISK004), partly by the Euro-
pean Commission within the Horizon Europe project Hexa-X-
II (101095759). B. Han (bin.han@rptu.de) is the correspond-
ing author.
REFERENCES
[1] N. H. Tran, W. Bao, A. Zomaya et al., “Federated learning over wireless
networks: Optimization model design and analysis,” in IEEE INFOCOM
2019 - IEEE Conference on Computer Communications, 2019, pp. 1387–
1395.
[2] S. Niknam, H. S. Dhillon, and J. H. Reed, “Federated learning for
wireless communications: Motivation, opportunities, and challenges,”
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 46–51, 2020.
[3] S. M. Sheikholeslami, A. Rasti-Meymandi, S. J. Seyed-Mohammadi
et al., “Communication-efficient federated learning for hybrid vlc/rf
indoor systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 126 479–126 493, 2022.
[4] M. M. Wadu, S. Samarakoon, and M. Bennis, “Federated learning under
channel uncertainty: Joint client scheduling and resource allocation,”
in 2020 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference
(WCNC), 2020, pp. 1–6.
[5] A. M. Elbir and S. Coleri, “Federated learning for hybrid beamforming
in mm-wave massive MIMO,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 24,
no. 12, pp. 2795–2799, 2020.
[6] S. Elbir, Ahmet M.and Coleri, “Federated learning for channel estima-
tion in conventional and ris-assisted massive MIMO,” IEEE Transactions
on Wireless Communications, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 4255–4268, 2022.
[7] S. Shahabodini, M. Mansoori, J. Abouei et al., “Recurrent neural
network and federated learning based channel estimation approach in
mmwave massive MIMO systems,” Transactions on Emerging Telecom-
munications Technologies, vol. 35, 12 2023.
[8] Y.-S. Jeon, M. Mohammadi Amiri, and N. Lee, “Communication-
efficient federated learning over MIMO multiple access channels,” IEEE
Transactions on Communications, vol. 70, no. 10, pp. 6547–6562, 2022.
[9] M. M. Amiri and D. G¨und¨uz, “Federated learning over wireless fading
channels,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 19,
no. 5, pp. 3546–3557, 2020.
[10] M. S. H. Abad, E. Ozfatura, D. GUndUz et al., “Hierarchical federated
learning across heterogeneous cellular networks,” in ICASSP 2020 -
2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP), 2020, pp. 8866–8870.
[11] W. Hou, J. Sun, G. Gui et al., “Federated learning for dl-csi prediction in
fdd massive MIMO systems,” IEEE Wireless Communications Letters,
vol. 10, no. 8, pp. 1810–1814, 2021.
[12] J.-P. Hong, S. Park, and W. Choi, “Base station dataset-assisted broad-
band over-the-air aggregation for communication-efficient federated
learning,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 22,
no. 11, pp. 7259–7272, 2023.
[13] Y. Cao, S. Maghsudi, T. Ohtsuki et al., “Mobility-aware routing and
caching in small cell networks using federated learning,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Communications, pp. 1–1, 2023.
[14] E. M. Campos, A. G. Vidal, J. L. H. Ramos et al., “FedRDF: A robust
and dynamic aggregation function against poisoning attacks in federated
learning,” 2024, preprint available at arXiv:2402.10082.
[15] V. Rey, P. M. S´anchez S´anchez, A. Huertas Celdr´an et al., “Federated
learning for malware detection in IoT devices,” Computer Networks, vol.
204, p. 108693, 2022.
[16] L. Cao, H. Chen, X. Fan et al., “Bayesian federated learning: A survey,”
in IJCAI-23, 8 2023, pp. 7233–7242, survey Track.
[17] H.-Y. Chen and W.-L. Chao, “FedBE: Making bayesian model ensem-
ble applicable to federated learning,” in International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2021.
[18] B. Han and H. D. Schotten, “A secure and robust approach for distance-
based mutual positioning of unmanned aerial vehicles,” 2024, to appear
at IEEE WCNC 2024, preprint available at arXiv:2305.12021.
[19] F. O. Catak, M. Kuzlu, E. Catak et al., “Defensive distillation-based
adversarial attack mitigation method for channel estimation using deep
learning models in next-generation wireless networks,” IEEE Access,
vol. 10, pp. 98 191–98 203, 2022.
[20] Z. Fang, B. Han, and H. D. Schotten, “A reliable and resilient frame-
work for multi-uav mutual localization,” in 2023 IEEE 98th Vehicular
Technology Conference (VTC2023-Fall), 2023, pp. 1–7.
