Efficient Self-Learning and Model Versioning for
AI-native O-RAN Edge
Mounir Bensalem‚àó, Fin Gentzen‚àó, Tuck-Wai Choong‚ÄÝ, Yu-Chiao Jhuang‚ÄÝ, Admela Jukan‚àó, Jenq-Shiou Leu‚ÄÝ
‚àóTechnische Universit¬®at Braunschweig, Germany;
{mounir.bensalem, f.gentzen, a.jukan}@tu-bs.de
‚ÄÝNational Taiwan University of Science and Technology, Taipei, Taiwan
{d11302001, d10902011, jsleu}@mail.ntust.edu.tw
Abstract‚ÄîThe AI-native vision of 6G requires Radio Access
Networks to train, deploy, and continuously refine thousands of
machine learning (ML) models that drive real-time radio network
optimization. Although the Open RAN (O-RAN) architecture
provides open interfaces and an intelligent control plane, it
leaves the life-cycle management of these models unspecified.
Consequently, operators still rely on ad-hoc, manual update
practices that can neither scale across the heterogeneous, multi-
layer stack of Cell-Site, Edge-, Regional-, and Central-Cloud
domains, nor across the three O-RAN control loops (real-, near-
real-, and non-real-time). We present a self-learning framework
that provides an efficient closed-loop version management for an
AI-native O-RAN edge. In this framework, training pipelines in
the Central/Regional Cloud continuously generate new models,
which are cataloged along with their resource footprints, security
scores, and accuracy metrics in a shared version repository.
An Update Manager consults this repository and applies a self-
learning policy to decide when and where each new model version
should be promoted into operation. A container orchestrator
then realizes these decisions across heterogeneous worker nodes,
enabling multiple services (rApps, xApps, and dApps) to obtain
improved inference with minimal disruption. Simulation results
show that an efficient RL-driven decision-making can guarantee
quality of service, bounded latencies while balancing model
accuracy, system stability, and resilience.
I. INTRODUCTION
AI-Native integration has emerged as a core feature of 6G,
with artificial intelligence (AI) distributed across all network
layers to support new services and enable network automation
and optimization [1]. The Open Radio Access Network (O-
RAN) architecture, founded on openness, intelligence, virtu-
alization, and interoperability [2], offers the programmable
control plane (SMO/RIC) and standardized interfaces required
to embed AI capabilities. However, realizing an autonomous
and self-learning 6G O-RAN edge presents an important
operational challenge: how to manage the life-cycle of a
rapidly growing amount of ML models that must be re-trained,
versioned, and rolled out at scale while guaranteeing service
continuity. On the other hand, towards achieving AI-native
vision of O-RAN, the ability to train, deploy, and continuously
refine machine-learning (ML) models is critical for radio-
resource management, traffic steering, energy savings, security
enforcement, and a host of emerging 6G services.
In radio environments, traffic patterns and user behaviors
can change in minutes. To stay effective, RAN-optimization
models (e.g., those driving beamforming or hand-over deci-
sions) require frequent re-training on fresh data. Each training
event yields a new model version whose benefits (higher ac-
curacy) must be weighed against potential hazards (instability,
security vulnerabilities, resource spikes). In today‚Äôs deploy-
ments, operators rely on manual or heuristic update policies
that do not scale to the hundreds of rApps/xApps/dApps
foreseen for 6G, and the O-RAN specifications intentionally
leave life-cycle management to vendor-specific solutions. Con-
sequently, networks risk either lagging behind the state-of-the-
art or suffering disruptive roll-outs. This is an open issues in
today‚Äôs networks that needs to be urgently addressed.
This paper proposes for the first time an efficient, self-
learning ML model versioning management for an AI-native
O-RAN edge. We design the first end-to-end ML life-cycle
framework that unifies cloud-based training with multi-layer
O-RAN inference, explicitly accounting for accuracy, relia-
bility, security, and stability across the three O-RAN control
loops. We propose a practical RL-driven update policy that
leverages fine-grained telemetry and a version repository to
maximize network utility while safeguarding stability. Simu-
lation results show that in a dynamic environment when AI-
based RIC applications (rApps/xApps/dApps) might requires
updates, RL tends to favor stability over accuracy improvement
of ML models for dApps while preserving delay constraints.
At the same time, the framework tends to update ML models
used by xApps and rApps for the scenarios where updating
ML models has minimal impact on delay constraints.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
presents the related work. Section III describes the reference
architecture. Section IV formulates the ML model versioning
optimization problem and the RL-based solution. Section V
presents numerical results. Section VI concludes the paper.
II. RELATED WORK
The past decade has witnessed an explosive growth in the
size and complexity of ML models, accompanied by continual
improvements in accuracy and robustness [3]. To remain
effective, deployed models must be re-trained and re-deployed
whenever data distributions, operating conditions, or security
requirements change [4]. This calls for rigorous versioning of
models, data, and code, a problem recognized by the MLOps
community as one of its grand challenges [5].
arXiv:2601.17534v1  [cs.NI]  24 Jan 2026
Central Server Cluster
Worker 4
SMO Framework
Regional Server Cluster
Edge Server Cluster
Container Orchestrator
UEs
Cell Site
Edge Cloud
Regional Cloud
Update
Policy
Publish
Telemetry
Central Cloud
Timescale: <1ms
Timescale: <10ms
Timescale: 10ms - 1s
Timescale: >1s
Worker 2
O-CU-UP
O-CU-CP
dApp 2
Worker B
Model Inference Host
ML-x1 v1.2 ML-x2 v2.0
Worker 3
Near-RT RIC
xApp 1
xApp 2
Node B
Node 2
Node 3
Worker A
Model Inference Host
ML-d2 v1.5
ML-d1 v1.0
Worker C
Model Inference Host
ML-r1 v2.1 ML-r2 v1.5
Node C
Node A
Node 4
Update Manager
Worker D
Model Training Host
ML-d1 v1.2
ML-x2 v3.0
ML-d2 v2.0
ML-r1 v3.0
ML-x1 v2.0
ML-r2 v2.0
Node D
x
Non-RT RIC
rApp 1
rApp 2
O-RU
IoT
Applications
Worker 1
dApp 1
O-DU
Node 1
O-RAN Component
¬ÝConnection
AI/ML Service¬Ý
Connection
Fig. 1: O-RAN compliant reference architecture with self-learning and ML model versioning.
Early studies concentrated on updating a single model in
cloud settings, e.g., forecasting data-series in [6]. More recent
work has shifted toward edge deployments, where limited
resources and latency constraints exacerbate the trade-off
between accuracy, reliability, security, and system stability [7].
Prior research‚Äîincluding our own optimization framework for
edge-only scenarios [8], has shown that reinforcement-learning
(RL) agents can automate version selection by balancing
accuracy, stability, and security. However, those studies assume
a homogeneous edge setting and treat model training as an
external, offline process. The hierarchical O-RAN stack that
spans Cell-Site, Edge-, Regional-, and Central-Cloud layers
was not studied, in which there is a need to coordinate updates
across treal-time, near-real-time, non-real-time control loops.
O-RAN seeks to disaggregate the classical base station
into an Open Radio Unit (O-RU), Open Distributed Unit (O-
DU), and Open Central Unit (O-CU), interconnected through
standardized open interfaces such as the Open Fronthaul
and F1/Mid-haul [2]. Additional management and intelligence
are provided by the Service Management and Orchestration
(SMO) framework and by two RAN Intelligent Controllers:
the Near-Real-Time RIC (running xApps, 10 ms‚Äì1 s loops)
and the Non-Real-Time RIC (running rApps, loops > 1 s).
Very recent work further proposes dApps inside the CU/DU
to provide sub-10 ms decision making [9].
Existing MLOps research does not consider the demanding
latency, heterogeneous hardware, and layered control loops
of O-RAN, whereas O-RAN-specific studies do not study,
systematic, data-driven version management. To the best of
our knowledge, there is still no end-to-end framework that (i)
integrates cloud-based training with edge/near-RT inference,
(ii) accounts for multi-objective trade-offs (accuracy, reliabil-
ity, security, and stability), and (iii) scales across the Cell-Site,
Edge-, Regional-, and Central-Cloud layers while respecting
the real-time, near-real-time, and non-real-time control loops.
This paper fills this knowledge gap by introducing a self-
learning framework for large-scale model version management
in AI-native 6G O-RAN. Our solution embraces the full O-
RAN stack, coordinates updates across all three control loops,
and is the first to unify cloud-side training with distributed
inference while explicitly optimizing for accuracy, security,
reliability, and service continuity.
III. REFERENCE ARCHITECTURE
Figure 1 presents the reference architecture adopted in this
work, which follows the multi-layer structure and key com-
ponents compliant with the O-RAN specifications [10]. The
system is structured into multiple functional context layers,
starting from User Equipment (UE) over to the central cloud.
At the Cell-Site layer, O-RUs carry out RF processing; the
cloudification of these units and the definition of an O-RU
Accelerator Abstraction Layer (AAL) are still open research
topics [11]. The Edge-Cloud layer hosts the O-DU and O-CU
functions. The Regional-Cloud layer accommodates the Near-
RT RIC, and (iv) the Central-Cloud layer contains the Non-RT
RIC together with SMO services. A salient feature of these
layered architecture is in its concentric control loops [11]:
(i) a non-real-time loop (periods > 1s) executed by rApps
in the Non-RT RIC for policy management and long-term
optimization; (ii) a near-real-time loop (10ms - 1s) handled by
xApps in the Near-RT RIC for short- to medium-term resource
control; and, (iii) a real-time loop (< 10ms) implemented by
dApps embedded within the E2-connected CU/DU nodes for
immediate radio-access decisions [9]. Together, these layers
and feedback loops provide the hierarchical control framework
that supports the proposed networking solution.
In the depicted architecture, the ML models reside on
O-Cloud compute nodes, while dApps, xApps, and rApps
Update Manager
API Gateway
HTTP requests
Knowledge Base
Update¬Ý
agent
Version
Repository
Telemetry
publish
- Used resources
- Deployed ML models
- Accuracy
- Required
¬Ý ¬Ýresources¬Ý
- Security
- Reliability
Replication Manager
Request to train
¬Ýa new model
train new model
User
Container Orchestrator
update policy
Fig. 2: ML Update Manager
obtain inference by invoking the Model Inference Host run-
ning on Workers A‚ÄìC. Figure 1 further illustrates the ML
model version management pipeline. Training jobs running in
Worker D (e.g., ML-d1-v1.2 representing an ML task used
by dApps, and ML-x2 v2.0 for xApps) generate candidate
models; after validation, specific versions (e.g., ML-d1 v1.0,
ML-x1 v1.2) are promoted to production. Additionally, Figure
1 shows the Update Manager as an independent component
responsible for coordinating ML model update strategies and
releases. The Container Orchestrator is responsible for the
actual deployment and management of ML model containers,
ensuring smooth model updates. This design allows the system
to flexibly deploy different versions of ML models on different
computing resources (such as Workers A-D), thereby achiev-
ing efficient version management and resource utilization.
A. ML Update Manager
The ML Update Manager uses data from the Telemetry,
Knowledge Base, and Update Agents. Telemetry continuously
captures operational data, including notifications of newly
available ML model versions pushed from the cloud, and
stores it for later analysis. Knowledge Base is assumed to
hosts ML Version Repository that stores every model release
along with its resource footprint and quality attributes, such
as accuracy, stability, reliability, and security scores. Update
Agent uses runs algorithms to decide whether an update of the
ML model should be executed immediately, or delayed.
The ML Update Manager decides whether a running ML-
inference replica should keep its current ML model or switch
to a newly released one. After every inference request, the
Update Agent checks if a fresher model version is available.
If it finds one, it weighs the merits of leaving the replica
untouched versus terminating it and spawning a new instance
that uses the latest model. The logic behind this choice may
be based on anything from simple domain-specific heuristics
to advanced optimization routines or reinforcement-learning
agents trained to discover near-optimal policies.
For lifecycle management, each model release carries two
identifiers: a major version X and a minor version Y, expressed
as X.Y. A major upgrade (X) signals substantial changes,
e.g., a new network architecture or significant feature addi-
tions‚Äîand is usually rolled out at predetermined intervals to
avoid service disruption. Minor updates (Y) deliver targeted
improvements, such as security patches or reliability fixes, and
rApp 1
ML-r1 v1.0
E2 node
(O-CU, O-DU)
APP
External
Application
Framework
UE GPS
info
Configurations, eg. new
M-MIMO parameters
Data, eg. KPI's or Beam
Pattern Configuration table
Suggested configuration
Reports
Fig. 3: A simplified ML versioning flow diagram for massive
MIMO beamforming optimization, based on [12]
can be issued at any time in response to alerts, user feedback,
or live performance metrics.
B. A Sample ML-based workflow in O-RAN
Building on the O-RAN Alliance use-case catalogue [12],
which documents multiple scenarios that embed AI/ML infer-
ence and training in the RAN, we illustrate the ML workflow
in Figure 3. Here, the example is provided for Massive-MIMO
beamforming, based on Figure 4.6.3.1-1 from [12].
In general, External Application Framework supplies En-
richment Data to RIC applications; rApps, xApps, and dApps.
These applications fuse the enrichment data inputs with live
network measurements, execute ML-enabled models, and pro-
duce inference results that are translated into control Actions
and Reports exchanged with E2-connected nodes (O-CU, O-
DU). The resulting closed loop drives continuous optimization
of radio-network performance. The ML models are denoted by
ML-ID with a version (x.y) that can be periodically updated
based on measurements data to provide accurate predictions
and recommendations that improve the performance of the
system. Here, the Application Framework forwards UE GPS
coordinates alongside key performance indicators (KPIs) and
current beam-pattern settings to rApp 1. The model ML-
r1 v1.0 analyses this data and outputs recommended beam-
configuration updates. These recommendations are applied by
E2 nodes, which subsequently return updated performance
metrics to rApp 1, in an ongoing, self-optimizing cycle.
IV. ML MODEL VERSIONING WITH RL
A. Assumptions
We consider a system deployment, including a set of
model inference host nodes œµ = {E1, . . . , En, . . . , EN}, a
set of O-RAN nodes running RIC applications in the edge,
regional and central cloud, R = {Re, Rr, . . . , Rc}, where
Re = {Re
1, . . . , Re
n, . . . , Re
Ne} are the nodes in the edge cloud,
Rr = {Rr
1, . . . , Rr
n, . . . , Rr
Nr} the nodes in the regional cloud,
and Rc = {Rc
1, . . . , Rc
n, . . . , Rc
Nc} the nodes in the central
cloud. We assume that each node is constrained by a certain
amount of capacity modeled as a number of CPU units Cn,
RAM space Sn, and Disk space Dn.We consider a set of ML
models denoted as Œ∫ = {1, . . . , k, . . . , K}. We assume that
each ML model k, can have a version x ‚àà[0, X], We define
a decision variable a = 1 when updating a ML model k of
version x to a newer version x + 1, 0 otherwise. We define a
mapping function g(x, a) that gives the new version of an ML
model k of version x after a decision update a. Each version
x of model k requires resources bk,x = [bcpu
k,x, bram
k,x, bdisk
k,x], of
CPU units, RAM, and disk space.
We denote by Œ¥k,x(n) the number of replicas from ML
model k of version x allocated in node En. The resource
allocation has the capacity constraints, i.e.,
K
X
k=1
X
X
x=1
bcpu
k,xŒ¥k,x(n) ‚â§Cn,
‚àÄn ‚àà[1, N]
(1)
K
X
k=1
X
X
x=1
bram
k,xŒ¥k,x(n) ‚â§Rn,
‚àÄn ‚àà[1, N]
(2)
K
X
k=1
X
X
x=1
bdisk
k,xŒ¥k,x(n) ‚â§Dn,
‚àÄn ‚àà[1, N]
(3)
The equations (1)-(3) assures that the replicas created in
a node En does not require more that its CPU, RAM and
Disk capacity. We consider 5 types of delays: inference delay,
processing delay (RIC applications), transmission delay, delay
to spawn a replica (where applicable) and queuing delay. The
processing delay œÑ p
k of a RIC application using an ML model k
is including all O-RAN operations. The inference delay œÑ I
k,x,n
of an ML model k of version x deployed through a pod in
node En is distributed around an average value. We consider
transmission and propagation times to be a known parameter
since they depend on the distance between model inference
host nodes and the nodes that running RIC applications. The
routing and path computation is typically managed by the
container orchestrator (e.g., Kubernetes). We use F to denote
the total number of requests to a model k. The time to spawn
a new replica, œÑ s
k,n(a), is assumed constant and occurs when
resources are scaled or when the Update Manager replaces
version x with x + 1. If no update is performed (a = 0), the
spawn time is zero. We assume the system has a queuing buffer
for each ML model k. We denote by œÑ q
f(k) the total queuing
delay of a request f(k) of ML model k. The queuing delay
is measured as the difference between the departure request
time and the arrival request time plus the transmission plus
the spawn time and the processing and inference time. Finally,
the total delay œÑf(k) for each request f(k) of ML model k,
processed using a replica that runs version x is given as:
œÑf(k)(x, a) =œÑ p
k + œÑ I
k,g(x,a),n + œÑ t
k,n + œÑ s
k,n(a)
+ œÑ q
f(k),
‚àÄk ‚àà[1, K]
(4)
The average delay for all requests, is defined as, i.e.,
O1(‚àÜ, a) =
1
KF
K
X
k=1
F
X
f=1
œÑf(k)(x, y, a)
(5)
where ‚àÜdescribes the state of the network, including nodes,
and deployed replicas of ML models and their versions.
After training an ML model k, we obtain a new version that
is assumed to have a higher accuracy. We denote by Acck(x, a)
the accuracy of a ML model k with version x after taking an
update decision a. The average accuracy of all requests is
given by:
O2(‚àÜ, a) =
1
KF
K
X
k=1
F
X
f=1
Acck(x, a)
(6)
We assume that updates can improve the stability of an ML
model operation, defined as parameters Stk(x, a), assigned to
ML model k with version x after taking an update decision
a. We finally define an objective function to yield an average
among all requests as solution, i.e.,
O3(‚àÜ, a) =
1
KF
K
X
k=1
F
X
f=1
Stk(x, a)
(7)
B. Problem Formulation
We define our ML Model Versioning Problem (MMV) as a
multi-objective optimization problem, aiming at maximizing
the average ML model accuracy, stability of all processed
requests while minimizing the average delay. The MMV
problem is formulated as follows:
max
a‚ààA (‚àíO1(‚àÜ, a), O2(‚àÜ, a), O3(‚àÜ, a), )
subject to: Eq.(1), (2), (3)
(8)
Algorithm 1 RL-based Model Versioning
1: Input: Event list; bk, Network state (Z, Q)
2: Initialization: Q-table Qt, exploration rate œµ, learning rate Œ±lr, discount
factor Œ≥, max episodes, œµ-decay
3: for all events do
4:
if an update is possible or scaling is triggered then
5:
s ‚Üê(Z, Q, e, f)
6:
a ‚ÜêUPDATEDECISION(s)
‚ñ∑chooses action agnostic of
œµ-greedy
7:
Z‚Ä≤, Q‚Ä≤, e‚Ä≤, f‚Ä≤ ‚ÜêGetNextState(¬∑)
8:
s‚Ä≤ ‚Üê(Z‚Ä≤, Q‚Ä≤, e‚Ä≤, f‚Ä≤)
9:
Qt ‚ÜêUPDATEQTABLE(s, a, s‚Ä≤)
10:
s ‚Üês‚Ä≤
11:
else
12:
pass
13:
end if
14:
if œµ > œµmin then
15:
œµ ‚Üêœµ ¬∑ decay
16:
end if
17: end for
C. RL-Based Update Decision
Our RL solution comprises the usual components: agent,
state space S, action space A, reward R, and the environment.
The agent observes metrics such as delay, security, reliability,
accuracy, and stability for each update decision and uses a
Q-table to track state/action pairs and the resultant rewards.
State space is denoted by S = { s | s = (Zk, fk, Qk, e, ‚Ñ¶)},
where i) Zk = {Œ∂1,k, . . . , Œ∂n,k, . . . , Œ∂N,k} captures the capacity
status of each node n for model k (CPU, RAM, and Disk). ii)
fk is the integer identifier for the ML model in use. iii) Qk is
an integer variable representing the queue size for model k.
The reward R combines delay œà, accuracy œÖ, and stability
œÉ, representing the disruption introduced by frequent updates:
R(s, a) = ‚àí(1 ‚àíŒ±)(w1 œà + w2 œÉ) + Œ±w3 œÖ,
(9)
where higher values of œë, Œ∑, and œÖ are desired, whereas
delay œà and destabilization œÉ are penalized. The weighting
factors wi ‚â•0 can be tuned to emphasize different objectives,
while Œ± is coefficient that controls the trade-off between the
maximization and minimization of different goals.
Algorithm 1 illustrates our self-learning procedure for up-
date decisions. At each event (arrival or departure), the agent
observes the system state s, consults its Q-table to select
an action a (balancing exploration and exploitation via œµ-
greedy), and computes the subsequent state s‚Ä≤. The Q-table is
then updated accordingly. Over repeated episodes, the agent
converges toward policies that balance optimal model updates
in terms of delay, accuracy, security, reliability, and stability.
In the early training phase, the agent executes exploratory
actions with probability œµ to discover a diverse set of state-
action paths. As the agent gathers more experience, œµ di-
minishes until reaching a minimal exploration rate, favoring
exploitation of learned policies. Each node n has CPU, RAM,
and disk capacities, as well as an associated transmission
times. For instance, higher latencies for the cloud node can
also be integrated as part of Z, Q, and e within the RL
environment. By applying the RL-based approach, the system
adaptively learns whether updating at a given node config-
uration is beneficial or whether continuing with an existing
version is more favorable, considering performance, resource
constraints, and stability factors.
V. NUMERICAL EVALUATION
We perform a numerical analysis to evaluate the efficiency
and performance of different update agent implementations to
decide whether to proceed with updating to the latest version
of an ML model or to continue operating with the existing
stable version. We employ an event-based simulator with inter-
arrival and service times following a negative exponential
distribution and report the results with 98% confidence level.
A first-fit algorithm is used for resource allocation in assigning
ML model instances to worker nodes. For scaling, we adopt
a monitoring-based approach, commonly used in practice.
This algorithm monitors the load on each worker: if the load
exceeds a predefined threshold, a new replica is scheduled
for creation. On the other hand, if a replica is idle, having
processed all queued requests and awaiting new ones, it is
removed. If neither condition is met, no scaling action is taken.
In addition to the RL-based update agent, we also implement
several baseline strategies: i) always update, ii) never update,
iii) randomly select updates, and iv) server load-based update.
Always update, never update, and update randomly serve as
reference points to understand baseline behavior. The Server
Load-based strategy operates based on the current load of
the node hosting the replica. When deciding whether to
update an existing replica, the algorithm computes the load
on the corresponding node. If this load is below a predefined
threshold, the algorithm proceeds with the update; otherwise,
it continues execution with the current ML model version. In
the following experiments, we assume a load threshold value
of 0.5. When creating new replicas, the Server Load-based
strategy selects the model version at random, as the target
node for deployment is not yet known and an accurate load
estimate is therefore unavailable.
Our topology is similar to the studied architecture in Figure
1. In the Edge Cloud we assume 2 ORAN-worker nodes,
and 2 ML-worker nodes for ML model inference. All of the
Edge Cloud nodes are assumed to have 32 CPU cores and
32 GB of RAM. In the Regional Cloud, Near-Real-time RIC
is deployed on the ORAN site and a cloud node is allocated
for ML inference, with unlimited CPU and RAM capacities.
Same assumptions are adopted for the Central Cloud.
Parameter
ML-d1
ML-d2
ML-x1
ML-x2
ML-r1
ML-r2
Version
0 ‚Äì 2000
Avg service time (ms)
2‚Äì0.5
4‚Äì0.8
200‚Äì100
300‚Äì200
1000‚Äì900
2000‚Äì1800
Avg inter-arrival time (ms)
3
4
350
525
1750
3500
Spawn time
3
3
100
100
1000
1000
CPU requirement
1
2
16
8
32
32
RAM requirement
1
1
32
32
48
64
Disk requirement
0.01
0.02
0.1
0.2
1
2
Accuracy
0.7‚Äì1.0
0.7‚Äì1.0
0.75‚Äì1.0
0.75‚Äì1.0
0.8‚Äì1.0
0.8‚Äì1.0
Stability
1.0‚Äì0.7
1.0‚Äì0.7
1.0‚Äì0.7
1.0‚Äì0.7
1.0‚Äì0.7
1.0‚Äì0.7
TABLE I: ML model parameters simulated.
We simulate six ML models that power O-RAN RIC func-
tions (Table I). Each model is initially released as version
0.0, followed by major u and minor upgrades (1.0, 2.0,
..., 10.200). With each update, inference accuracy increases,
whereas replica stability and service time gradually degrade.
Each major release improves inference accuracy by ‚àº2%,
but reduces replica stability by ‚àº2% and the service time
by ‚àº7%. A subversion update will improve the ML model
accuracy by ‚àº0.1%, to imitate a small performance up-
date, and the stability will decrease by ‚àº0.1%. For the
reward function defined in Eq. (9), the weights are set to:
w1 = 0.025, w2 = 1, w3 = 2. For Q-table update, we set
Œ± = 0.01, Œ≥ = 0.99, the initial exploration probability œµ = 1
, this will decay with up to a minimal œµmin = 0.001 which
will be reached after half of the scheduled events have been
processed. RL settings are mainly for training and have shown
good performance during hyperparameter tuning.
Fig. 4 shows boxplots for the delays (O1) of the entire
ORAN RIC application flows for dApp, xApp and rApp. For
the ORAN-dApp in Fig. 4a, the delay for the always update
strategy is the best, as expected, because although it needs to
spawn new replicas, whenever there is a new version available
to update existing replicas, the new versions will have lower
inference time. The never update strategy performs worse,
but is comparable to the random, rl and load-based update
strategies. All delays result around median values of 10 to
12 milliseconds, as typical for dApp delays. For the ORAN-
xApp in Fig. 4b, the median delay is 490 milliseconds, for the
always update strategy is the lowest, together with the load-
based update strategy. Both update strategies have the highest
standard deviation, because of the added spawn time, which
is higher in relation to the processing than in the dApp case.
always
never random
rl
load
5
10
15
Delay (in ms)
(a) ORAN-dApp
always
never random
rl
load
250
500
750
1000
Delay (in ms)
(b) ORAN-xApp
always
never random
rl
load
4100
4150
4200
Delay (in ms)
(c) ORAN-rApp
Fig. 4: Delay for different O-RAN RIC application workflows
dApp
xApp
rApp
dApp
xApp
rApp
dApp
xApp
rApp
dApp
xApp
rApp
dApp
xApp
rApp
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Accuracy (in %)
always
never
random
rl
load
(a) Accuracy
dApp
xApp
rApp
dApp
xApp
rApp
dApp
xApp
rApp
dApp
xApp
rApp
dApp
xApp
rApp
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Stability (in %)
always
never
random
rl
load
(b) Stability
Fig. 5: Performance metrics for ML Models
For ORAN-rApp in Fig. 4c the delays result in a median of
4.11 seconds, where the always update strategy results again
in the lowest median, followed by the RL strategy.
Fig. 5 shows boxplots for the average accuracy (O2) and the
average stability (O3) for all update strategies and all O-RAN
RIC applications. In Fig. 5a, the accuracy of the always update
strategy is the highest for all ORAN applications and the
lowest for the never update strategy. The load-based strategy
achieves a better median than the random update strategy but
the rl strategy decides to prefer the stability of the system over
the highest accuracy, especially for the latency constrained
ORAN-dApp. For the xApp and rApp the RL agent archives
better accuracy values than the other two strategies. The
stability shown in Fig. 5b is always fixed to 1 for the never
update strategy. Always updating results in the lowest stability,
but the rl strategy achieves very high stability values for dApp
and comparable stability for xApp and rApp in perspective of
random update and load-based update strategies.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper tackled a critical gap on the path to AI-native 6G:
scalable self-learning life-cycle management of the many ML
models that will drive rApps, xApps, and dApps in O-RAN.
We presented the first end-to-end framework that links cloud-
side training with edge-side inference. Our solution jointly
optimized ML model accuracy, stability, and latency across
the O-RAN control loops. Simulation results showed that RL
policy learns to prioritize stability for delay-sensitive dApps
while upgrading rApps/xApps at moments that minimize la-
tency impact, thereby increasing overall network utility and
reducing SLA violations compared to baselines. These findings
confirm that closed-loop, telemetry-driven model versioning
is essential for future SMO/RIC platforms. Future work will
focus on testbed validation and security-aware reward design.
REFERENCES
[1] W. Wu, C. Zhou, M. Li, H. Wu, H. Zhou, N. Zhang, X. S. Shen, and
W. Zhuang, ‚ÄúAi-native network slicing for 6g networks,‚Äù IEEE Wireless
Communications, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 96‚Äì103, 2022.
[2] ‚ÄúO-ran
architecture
description
13.0,‚Äù
O-RAN
Alliance,
Tech.
Rep. O-RAN.WG1.TS.OAD-R004-v13.00, 2025, accessed: 2025-04-24.
[Online]. Available: https://www.o-ran.org/specifications
[3] A. Paleyes, R.-G. Urma, and N. D. Lawrence, ‚ÄúChallenges in deploying
machine learning: a survey of case studies,‚Äù ACM computing surveys,
vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1‚Äì29, 2022.
[4] D.
Angioni,
L.
Demetrio,
M.
Pintor,
L.
Oneto,
D.
Anguita,
B. Biggio, and F. Roli, ‚ÄúRobustness-congruent adversarial training for
secure machine learning model updates,‚Äù 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.17390
[5] D. Kreuzberger, N. K¬®uhl, and S. Hirschl, ‚ÄúMachine learning operations
(mlops): Overview, definition, and architecture,‚Äù IEEE access, vol. 11,
pp. 31 866‚Äì31 879, 2023.
[6] F. Brito and et. al., ‚ÄúWhen and how to update ai/ml models in 6g
resource-constrained network domains?‚Äù in 2024 Joint European Con-
ference on Networks and Communications & 6G Summit (EuCNC/6G
Summit), 2024, pp. 937‚Äì942.
[7] B. Beyer, C. Jones, J. Petoff, and N. R. Murphy, Site Reliability
Engineering: How Google Runs Production Systems, 2016. [Online].
Available: http://landing.google.com/sre/book.html
[8] F. Gentzen, M. Bensalem, and A. Jukan, ‚ÄúEffective ml model versioning
in edge networks,‚Äù International Wireless Communications and Mobile
Computing (IWCMC), 2025.
[9] ‚Äúdapps for real-time ran control: Use cases and requirements,‚Äù
O-RAN next Generation Research Group, Tech. Rep. RR-2024-10,
2024, accessed: 2025-04-24. [Online]. Available: https://www.o-ran.
org/o-ran-resources
[10] ‚ÄúO-RAN
Cloud
Architecture
and
Deployment
Scenarios
for
O-
RAN
Virtualized
RAN
8.01,‚Äù
O-RAN
Alliance,
Tech.
Rep.
O-RAN.WG6.CADS-v08.01, 2025, accessed: 2025-04-24. [Online].
Available: https://www.o-ran.org/specifications
[11] M. Polese, L. Bonati, S. D‚ÄôOro, S. Basagni, and T. Melodia, ‚ÄúUn-
derstanding o-ran: Architecture, interfaces, algorithms, security, and re-
search challenges,‚Äù IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 25,
no. 2, pp. 1376‚Äì1411, 2023.
[12] ‚ÄúO-RAN.WG1.TS.Use-Cases-Detailed-Specification-R004-v16.00
Technical
Specification,‚Äù
O-RAN
Alliance,
Tech.
Rep.
O-
RAN.WG1.TS-R004-v16.00, 2025, accessed: 2025-04-24. [Online].
Available: https://www.o-ran.org/specifications
