TinyLLM: A Framework for Training and Deploying
Language Models at the Edge Computers
Savitha Viswanadh Kandala
National University of Singapore
viswanadh@u.nus.edu
Pramuka Medaranga
National University of Singapore
pramukas@comp.nus.edu.sg
Ambuj Varshney
National University of Singapore
ambujv@nus.edu.sg
Abstract
Language models have gained significant interest due to
their general-purpose capabilities, which appear to emerge
as models are scaled to increasingly larger parameter sizes.
However, these large models impose stringent requirements
on computing systems, necessitating significant memory and
processing requirements for inference. This makes perform-
ing inference on mobile and edge devices challenging, often
requiring invocating remotely-hosted models via network
calls. Remote inference, in turn, introduces issues like latency,
unreliable network connectivity, and privacy concerns. To
address these challenges, we explored the possibility of de-
viating from the trend of increasing model size. Instead, we
hypothesize that much smaller models ( 30-120M parame-
ters) can outperform their larger counterparts for specific
tasks by carefully curating the data used for pre-training
and fine-tuning. We investigate this within the context of de-
ploying edge-device models to support sensing applications.
We trained several foundational models through a system-
atic study and found that small models can run locally on
edge devices, achieving high token rates and accuracy. Based
on these findings, we developed a framework1 that allows
users to train foundational models tailored to their specific
applications and deploy them at the edge.
1
Introduction
We have seen considerable interest in machine learning mod-
els based on transformer architecture [56]. They are trained
across modalities: Models trained on textual data have given
rise to large language models (LLMs) [4, 8, 37, 41, 52], which
are now widely used for interaction with computers through
chatbots. Similarly, models that are trained on images [44]
can now generate photorealistic visuals. Models that can gen-
erate music are also trained on analog information like acous-
tic data [22]. Nonetheless, we find that a common thread
across these models is the scaling of the training data size.
This follows the observation that larger training datasets
result in models that can provide more accurate responses
while demonstrating general-purpose capabilities [6, 24, 58].
At a high level, a machine-learning model is defined by its
parameters—weights that the model learns during training.
The larger the model, the more parameters it has, and the
more data it requires to effectively learn from training [19,
1https://tinyllm.org/
Custom Foundational
Models
User
Edge Computer
Sensor Devices
Figure 1. An embedded application often involves sensors that
collect environmental data, which is then communicated to
an edge device. TinyLLM provides a framework for training
foundational models tailored for edge deployment, enabling
these models to support a variety of tasks. This work explores
training custom foundational models to enhance sensor data
analysis. Our approach demonstrates a significantly smaller
parameter-sized model than state-of-the-art language models,
facilitating high-accuracy sensor data analysis while enabling
rapid, local inference on even a constrained edge platform.
24]. State-of-the-art (SoTA) models now reach hundreds of
billions of parameters [4, 11], posing significant challenges
due to elevated computational demands.
As parameter size grows, so do the memory and process-
ing requirements for training and inference, limiting the
feasibility of training and using these models on commod-
ity computing systems. Typically, a model of tens to hun-
dreds of billions of parameters requires clusters of expensive
graphical processing units (GPU) running for a prolonged
period [38], making this task highly challenging and infea-
sible for most people and organizations. For example, the
Llama 3.1 70B variant required approximately 7 million GPU
hours on Nvidia H100-80GB hardware, while the 405B vari-
ant required over 31 million GPU hours [11]. Using 16,000
GPUs for pre-training, this translates to around 20 days of
training for the 70B model and 78 days for the 405B model.
Beyond training, a larger parameter size model also nega-
tively impacts the inference process. This is a step where the
weights are loaded into memory and then used to answer
queries through prompts provided by the user. As parameter
size grows, so do the memory and processing requirements
for inference, limiting the feasibility of using these models
on commodity systems [17, 47, 63]. For instance, loading a
70B parameter model in half-precision (FP16) would require
at least 140GB of memory, exceeding the capacity of most
GPUs. Today, even high-specification workstations strug-
gle with memory bandwidth limitations, leading to the rise
of alternative strategies to tackle model scaling [11, 25, 59].
1
arXiv:2412.15304v1  [cs.LG]  19 Dec 2024
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Viswanadh and Ambuj
Custom
Dataset
Trained
Model
Fine-tuned
Model
Edge  
Deployment
1
2
3
4
Source
Datasets
Figure 2. TinyLLM trains a custom foundational model for
deployment at the edge device following a series of steps. It
begins by appending a curated dataset with general conver-
sational data. After pre-processing, the dataset is tokenized to
pre-train a small model (30-120M parameter). The pre-trained
model undergoes fine-tuning with the custom dataset before
deployment on the edge device to support embedded applica-
tions.
Consequently, the dominant mode of accessing models from
mobile and edge devices has become function calls over a
network to remotely hosted models. However, this approach
introduces several challenges, including latency issues, un-
predictable network conditions, and privacy concerns related
to sharing sensitive information.
A promising approach to tackle this challenge is explic-
itly trading off parameter size. A smaller parameter-sized
model requires proportionally smaller memory and comput-
ing resources and can also perform inference faster, even on
devices with constrained processing capabilities such as edge
computers. TinyLLM framework builds on this approach.
TinyLLM Framework Overview. We systematically study
various trade-offs, models, and architectures and design a
framework to pre-train foundational models from scratch.
This framework is tailored to deploy such models at the edge.
We prototype it for a challenging case related to embedded
sensing, finding that much smaller models, with only tens
of millions of parameters—orders of magnitude smaller than
SoTA models—are sufficient for sensor data inference. We
consolidate these insights into a framework called TinyLLM,
meaning “more” in Swedish and “own” in Hindi. Pre-trained
on carefully curated data, these smaller models offer signifi-
cant benefits for embedded sensing applications. They can
run locally on constrained edge platforms and perform rapid
inference on modestly configured edge and mobile devices.
TinyLLM Design. TinyLLM simplifies the process for end-
users to train custom foundational models for deployment
at the edge. Users only need to provide a suitable training or
fine-tuning dataset, and the framework manages the remain-
ing steps to create a tailored foundational model. Performing
this process involves following steps, as illustrated in Fig-
ure 2.
The first step involves preparing the dataset as the founda-
tion for pre-training a model. Users can provide their dataset;
however, even for smaller custom models, large amounts of
data are typically required. It may be necessary to augment
this data with relevant datasets related to language and con-
versation. TinyLLM facilitates this process by preparing the
dataset for pre-training and offering a pre-curated collection
that users can use to complement their datasets, ensuring an
effective pre-training process.
The next step in the framework involves processing the
data, which is crucial due to the diverse application scenar-
ios requiring custom foundational models. For instance, in
embedded sensing applications, even a simple sensor like an
accelerometer may record motion across different axes. How-
ever, variations in resolution, sampling modes (analog vs.
digital), and other intricacies can introduce inconsistencies.
This step ensures data consistency by separating individual
sensor readings by timestamp and organizing them into rows
and columns. Additionally, it performs basic preprocessing
tasks, such as removing unnecessary characters or spaces to
fit the data within the model’s context window. Tokenization
is the final step in the processing of the data.
Next, the framework involves training the foundational
models. The framework adopts an architecture similar to
existing models like GPT-2, which has proven effective for
creating smaller models. Our results show that this approach
achieves high accuracy for sensor data analysis. Additionally,
the architecture allows flexibility in configuring parameter
sizes as low as 30 million. While training these smaller foun-
dational models still requires a GPU, the overall computing
resources are minimal. For instance, we completed training
on a single Nvidia H100 in just a few hours.
After pre-training the model, we found that through ex-
tensive experiments, despite careful curation of the dataset,
smaller models may still struggle to achieve high accuracy
for specific applications. Therefore, fine-tuning becomes cru-
cial to enhance their performance. The framework efficiently
manages this step, requiring only a small set of examples for
fine-tuning. Specifically, we employed the LoRa method for
fine-tuning, significantly reducing the number of samples
needed compared to traditional machine learning methods.
For instance, in hand gesture sensing one of the use cases
presented in the work. We only required 440 examples for the
model to achieve high accuracy in detecting future events.
Once the custom model is trained and fine-tuned, it can
be deployed on an edge device to support embedded sensing
applications. While smaller models are generally expected
to struggle with tasks involving mathematical operations
and reasoning—key elements in many sensor data analysis
tasks—we intentionally used these as a challenging test case
for our system. Surprisingly, we found that smaller models
can be highly effective for embedded sensing analysis and,
in some cases, even outperform much larger models with
significantly greater parameter sizes.
Summary of Results. The key results are:
• We present a framework that supports two primary
tasks: (1) training smaller models for edge deployment
on user-defined datasets and (2) fine-tuning these mod-
els or off-the-shelf LLMs on domain-specific datasets.
2
TinyLLM: A Framework for Training and Deploying Language Models at the Edge Computers
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
We demonstrate this by training five smaller models,
ranging from 30M to 124M parameters, following the
GPT-2 architecture. We also fine-tuned other models,
such as Phi 2, Phi 3, and Llama 2, Llama 3.
• We compare the accuracy of smaller custom models
trained through our framework, with fewer than 125M
parameters, against larger models with billions of pa-
rameters across different IoT sensor datasets, including
our collected and external datasets. Our results demon-
strate that these smaller models perform comparably
to larger ones while requiring significantly fewer GPU
resources and less training time.
• We investigate the suitability for deployment of smaller
models on resource-constrained edge platforms and
demonstrate that they lead to significantly faster in-
ference or token generation rates.
2
Background
We provide the necessary background relevant to the design
of TinyLLM. We also discuss and place related systems and
developments related to the proposed system, TinyLLM.
Conditional probability view of models. Language mod-
eling is framed as an unsupervised distribution estimation
problem. Given a sequence of tokens x = [𝑥1,𝑥2, . . . ,𝑥𝑛], the
language model places a probability distribution 𝑝(x) over
the output token sequence. This probability can be decom-
posed into a product of conditional probabilities where each
token depends on all the previous tokens:
𝑝(x) =
𝑛
Ö
𝑖=1
𝑝(𝑥𝑖| 𝑥1,𝑥2, . . . ,𝑥𝑖−1)
(1)
This formulation allows the model to generate text by
sampling from the distribution 𝑝(x) and provides a basis
for tractable estimation and sampling. The approach has
been significantly improved by introducing models capable
of computing these conditional probabilities effectively, such
as the Transformer architecture [56].
Causal language modeling proves effective for analyzing
user prompts and generating text. Auto-regressive decoder
models, such as GPT-2, are well-suited. These models, which
TinyLLM trains for deployment on edge devices, excel in
handling sequential data by predicting the next token based
on previous ones, making them ideal for generating coherent
text in response to user prompts.
Characterization of models. LLMs can be characterized
along two primary axes: computational and memory require-
ments and performance. The parameter count—the number
of weights a model contains—directly influences its com-
putational and memory demands. Models can vary widely
in size, ranging from hundreds of millions to billions of pa-
rameters. As parameter counts increase, so do the memory
and processing resources required. Commercial vendors now
offer models with parameter sizes reaching hundreds of bil-
lions, hosted on GPU-based clusters and accessible via web
chat interfaces or API calls. Examples include ChatGPT [35],
Claude [2], Gemini [52], and LLama [11, 54].
Performance-wise, two critical factors define LLMs: accu-
racy and response time. LLMs sometimes produce irrelevant
or factually incorrect responses, referred to as hallucina-
tions [31]. Minimizing hallucination rates is a key goal, as
higher rates negatively affect usability. Larger, cloud-based
models tend to exhibit lower hallucination rates, with on-
going improvements targeting further reductions [61]. Re-
sponse time, measured by the token generation rate, refers
to how many words or tokens the model generates per unit
of time. A higher token rate translates to faster responses to
user prompts.
Larger models are unsuitable for TinyLLM . Highly ca-
pable LLMs with tens to hundreds of billions of parameters
present challenges, making them unsuitable for TinyLLM .
First, these models require expensive and complex infrastruc-
ture for inference, typically involving powerful computers
with GPUs or custom ASICs. Second, due to their high re-
source demands, they are hosted by third-party providers and
accessed via API calls, leading to increased operational costs
for end-users. Third, sensor data, often containing private
information, must be shared with these providers, posing
significant privacy risks. Fourth, fine-tuning these models is
an expensive process requiring highly capable GPU-based
machines. Lastly, many of these models function as “black
boxes,” raising concerns about using private data for training
and fine-tuning without transparency.
Smaller models can run locally on edge computers.
Smaller language models [1, 11, 23, 43, 53, 54] trade param-
eter size for reduced computational and memory require-
ments, typically ranging from hundreds of millions to a few
billion parameters—much smaller than their larger counter-
parts. This reduction leads to smaller model weights; for
example, Microsoft Phi 2, with 2.7 billion parameters, has
weights around 5.5 GB. A system running an LLM requires
RAM at least as large as the model weight since the entire
model must load into memory for inference. As a result,
smaller models in half-precision (FP16) can run on edge-
class commodity computers with 8–32 GB of RAM, such as
Raspberry Pi [42], Lattepanda Sigma [26], and Intel N100 [3].
There has been recent interest in smaller models, which
inspire the design of TinyLLM. Ma et al. [29] introduces
variants of LLM with ternary weights -1, 0, 1, effectively
using just 1.58 bits per parameter instead of the usual 16-bit
(FP16) or 32-bit floating-point (FP32), reducing the computa-
tional and memory bandwidths significantly while perform-
ing comparably with full precision transformer. Ruoss et al.
[46] shows a development of a 270M parameter LLM based
on the transformer that achieves grandmaster-level chess
3
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Viswanadh and Ambuj
rating, reaching the performance of best chess engines, show-
ing that smaller and specialized models with careful training
can perform at par or better than rule-based ML systems.
Srinivas et al. [50] introduces knowledge boosting, where
a smaller model, usually deployed for real-time inferences
on wearables, obtains delayed hints from a relatively larger
model, often deployed on smartphones. This is shown in
tasks involving speech separation and enhancement. There
have also been works that have explored applying smaller
models to mobile devices. Yuan et al. [62] introduced the
concept of a "mobile foundation model," which functions
like firmware and can serve a wide range of tasks on smart-
phones. This model would be managed by the mobile OS and
hardware and exposed as a system service to applications.
TinyLLM allows for training at least an order of magnitude
smaller language models consisting of only tens of millions
of parameters. This enables faster inference even on con-
strained embedded platforms. From a training perspective,
the end-user may easily train their custom models even with
the modest computational resources. It also facilitates the
deployment of models on a wide range of simpler embedded
platforms with limited memory and RAM, including SBCs,
opening up the possibility of various embedded applications.
Challenges with remotely accessing larger models. To
bring the capabilities of language models to edge devices,
larger models can be accessed remotely. However, this ap-
proach introduces several challenges, particularly for em-
bedded sensing applications, which are the focus of this
work. First, maintaining persistent network connectivity is
often unfeasible, as many embedded sensing applications
involve mobile devices, resulting in intermittent and unpre-
dictable connections [40]. Second, variable network latency
and server constraints can lead to unpredictable response
times, affecting the quality of service for time-sensitive tasks.
Third, remote model access incurs costs, with providers
charging based on usage [36]. Fourth, embedded sensing
applications frequently collect sensitive user data, raising
privacy and security concerns when sharing information
with third parties [14]. Lastly, while SoTA models offer pow-
erful general-purpose capabilities, they can be excessive for
specific embedded sensing tasks, which often do not require
the full range of these models’ capabilities.
Our choice. TinyLLM focuses on utilizing smaller models
running locally on edge devices, driven by several key con-
siderations. Firstly, it enables executing the model closer to
end devices, minimizing network dependencies and latency.
Many end devices are situated in remote or hard-to-reach
locations, where maintaining persistent network connectiv-
ity for the gateway device is challenging. Secondly, many
sensor applications involve collecting sensitive environmen-
tal data, and transmitting this data to third-party providers
raises privacy concerns. Additionally, concerns persist re-
garding the use of such data to train LLMs. Thirdly, local
processing lowers operational costs, as third-party providers
typically charge per-token usage fees. Finally, as demon-
strated in this work, smaller, task-specific models running
locally can outperform generalized cloud-based models for
specific applications, making them preferable over invoking
more powerful but less specialized remote models.
3
Design
TinyLLM enables the training of custom foundational models
for embedded sensing for deployment on edge devices. It
manages various process stages, including pre-processing
diverse datasets to facilitate pre-training for a foundational
model tailored for embedded sensing applications. TinyLLM
also provides tools for fine-tuning models to align with the
application scenario. The final step involves training and
deploying the model on an edge device. We illustrate various
steps in the TinyLLM in the Figure 2, and describe them
next.
3.1
Dataset preparation for pre-training of a model
Training a foundational model requires a large corpus of data.
When relying on third-party foundational models, users typ-
ically have very little control over the datasets used in the
pre-training process, creating several challenges. First, users
are unsure if datasets relevant to their specific use case are
included in the model’s pre-training, often leading them to
opt for larger models with a higher likelihood of containing
such information. This, however, increases parameter size
and the computational requirements for inference. Second,
the opaque nature of these models raises legal and compli-
ance concerns, as users cannot verify whether the model
was trained on copyrighted or restricted content. Finally,
third-party models may also incur additional costs or impose
licensing restrictions, further limiting their usability.
TinyLLM enables users to curate the dataset used for pre-
training, giving them greater control over the information in-
cluded in the model’s training process. This approach reduces
non-essential information being part of the pre-training
dataset, resulting in the generation of highly specialized,
smaller models tailored for the specific application scenario.
3.2
Processing of the pre-training dataset
After preparing the dataset for pre-training, the next step in
the framework involves curating it for its efficient use during
the training. This step is crucial since datasets often come in
diverse formats and structures, which must be handled prop-
erly before use. Additionally, models have limited context
windows, so the data must be structured to maximize the ef-
ficient use of this window. Finally, the dataset is tokenized to
ensure compatibility with the training process. The process-
ing step ensures data consistency for subsequent usage in
the training process. We illustrate the various steps involved
in the processing stage of the framework in Figure 3.
4
TinyLLM: A Framework for Training and Deploying Language Models at the Edge Computers
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Data 
Batching
Batch
Annotation
Data 
Tokenisation
Train
Data 
Acquisition
Data 
Organising
Data Cleaning 
and Normalising
Sequence 
Delimitation
Time: [9.00.00, 9.00.05, ...]
Temp: [30.237, 32.005,  ...]
Humidity: [12.41, 57.23 ... ]
Merged Dataset
Split Dataset
Validation
[9.00.00, 30.2, 12, EOT]
[9.00.05, 32.0, 57, EOT]
[...]
 { [...], [...], ... , [...]  }
...
 { [...], [...], ... , [...] }
 {The data given contains
temp, humidity ... [...], [...],
... , [...]  }
 623, 1238, 4335, 8895,
5484, 11, 52876, 220 ...
0.3
0.5
0.2
[9.00.00, 30.237, 12.41] 
[9.00.05, 32.005, 57.23]
[...]
[9.00.00, 30.2, 12]
[9.00.05, 32.0, 57]
[...]
Figure 3. Processing the dataset is essential for effective pre-training. This step addresses the challenges posed by the dataset’s
diversity, ensures alignment of the dataset with the model’s context window size limitations, and formats the data appropriately for
its usage with the subsequent training process.
Transformation. The dataset structure often varies based
on the application, with much of it consisting of numerical
data. The first step focuses on transforming data into text
since models are primarily trained using textual informa-
tion. If the data contains timestamps, it may be grouped by
timestamp into separate rows and columns. The transfor-
mation also involves data cleaning to optimize usage within
the model’s limited context window. For example, GPT-2’s
1024-token context window can limit longer prompts. We ad-
dress this by normalizing readings to integers within specific
ranges (0 to 100), reducing each reading to two characters.
The framework adjusts character counts based on use cases
and available context windows, keeping data compact and
suitable for model training. The specific steps would vary by
application and the model that is employed.
Tokenization. Tokenization prepares datasets for pre-training
by converting text into numerical data that models can pro-
cess. It breaks text into tokens, which are smaller units rep-
resenting words, characters, or subwords. TinyLLM uses
the GPT-2 tokenizer to process the datasets. The tokenizer
processes tokens organized into data shards by TinyLLM
and marks row separations with end tokens. For unstruc-
tured datasets, we fill shards sequentially until the file is
completed. For structured datasets with multiple columns,
we merge columns into single prompts. Each prompt begins
with dataset context, including information about units and
data range, followed by data output and an end token. To
optimize memory usage, we merge, tokenize, and store all
prompts in fixed-size shards (200 MB). When tokens exceed
shard size, we create new shards from the excess tokens.
Splitting and Mixing. The final step before pre-training
involves mixing tokens from multiple datasets. Users can
define the appropriate proportions for different types of data.
For example, if the dataset includes textual conversations,
the user can specify the proportion of tokens from such
conversations. Using lazy loading, the framework loads the
tokenized datasets in chunks, efficiently managing large data
sizes. Tokens from different datasets are sampled based on
user-defined ratios. A probability-based sampling method
ensures that tokens are randomly selected from each dataset,
maintaining the specified proportions. The selected tokens
are then accumulated and saved into fixed-size shards, follow-
ing the same process as in earlier steps. By default, TinyLLM
splits the dataset into training and test sets in a 98:2 ratio.
3.3
Training a custom foundational model
Next, we describe steps to process a custom foundational
model based on the processed dataset. We discuss the archi-
tecture of the model that we pre-train in this work.
Model architecture. We design the model architecture
based on GPT-2 [41], a transformer-based, decoder-only lan-
guage model that generates text by predicting the next word
in a sequence. This architecture effectively supports training
smaller parameter-sized models, which motivated our choice.
Specifically, by adjusting the number of transformer blocks,
the model offers variants with parameter counts between
30M and 124M. Additionally, TinyLLM ensures flexibility,
allowing users to select and implement other architectures.
The architecture consists of an input embedding layer,
positional encoding, multiple transformer blocks (each con-
taining multi-head attention and feed-forward networks),
and a final output layer as shown in the Figure 4.
Input Embedding: Converts input tokens into dense vectors
of fixed size 𝐶. These vectors represent the input tokens in
a high-dimensional space where similar words have similar
vectors. The input tokens are characterised by the vocabulary
size (𝑉), which is the number of unique tokens (words or
subwords) the model can recognize and generate.
Positional Encoding: This layer adds the positional infor-
mation to the token embeddings so that the model can dis-
tinguish between the positions of tokens in a sequence. This
is important since the transformer architecture itself does
not inherently encode order information.
5
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Viswanadh and Ambuj
Input
Embedding
Input
Positional
Encoding
Transformer
Block
Transformer
Block
LayerNorm
Linear
Output
l blocks
...
LayerNorm
Linear
Multi-head
Attention
Linear
LayerNorm
Feed-Forward
Network
V * C
T * C
12C2 + 13C
C
V * C
Figure 4. The high-level representation of the architecture for
the model used in this work is based on the GPT-2. The model
architecture consists of l transformer blocks
Transformer Block (Repeated 𝑙Times): Each transformer
block consists of multiple sub-blocks which are as follows:
1) Layer Normalization: Normalizes the inputs to the block
to stabilize and speed up the training process. 2) Multi-Head
Attention: Applies self-attention to the inputs, allowing the
model to simultaneously focus on different parts of the se-
quence. This is done in multiple "heads" in parallel, each
learning different aspects of the sequence. 3) Feed-Forward
Network (FFN): Consists of two linear transformations with
a non-linearity (Gaussian Error Linear Unit (GeLU)) in be-
tween. It helps capture complex patterns by transforming
the output of the attention mechanism. 4) Residual Con-
nections and Additional LayerNorm: Adds the input of each
sub-layer (Attention and FFN) to its output to form a residual
connection. This helps in stabilizing the learning process.
Training process. To train a model, the TinyLLM builds
ontop of llm.c, that provides implementation of GPT-2. It
consists of 𝑙transformer blocks, with the total number of
parameters 𝑁summarized: The input embedding layer has
𝑉×𝐶parameters, and the Positional Encoding layer has𝑇×𝐶
parameters. Each transformer block contains layer normal-
ization, multi-head attention, and feed-forward network com-
ponents. The total parameters per block are 𝑙× (12𝐶2 + 12𝐶).
With 𝑉= 50, 257, 𝑇= 1, 024, 𝐶= 64𝑙, we can estimate the
total parameters of the model (in Million) approximately
using the empirical expression:
𝑁= 0.05𝑙3 + 3.2𝑙
(2)
By varying 𝑙, we can scale the model to different sizes,
balancing model capacity with computational requirements.
Embedded platforms are often limited in memory and
processing capabilities. Therefore, we intentionally select a
Depth (𝑙)
Hidden Size (𝐶)
Parameters (𝑁)
RAM Usage (MB)
6
384
30M
95.49
8
512
51M
148.37
10
640
82M
219.27
11
704
102M
262.89
12
768
124M
312.7
Table 1. Approximate parameter count and RAM usage of
the GPT-2 model for given depth and hidden size values
Prompt: Gesture Detection
### Instruction:
Sensor data values are provided in the following
order: proximity, red, green, and blue light intensity
values. Using these sensor values, determine the
hand gesture performed. Give your answer only as
Tap, Double, or Hold.
### Input:
Proximity: [2, 10, ..., 23]
Red: [244, 243, ..., 20]
Blue: [255, 255, ..., 255]
Green: [200, 201, ..., 45]
### Response:
Hold
Figure 5. We borrow a template from Alpaca for prompts and
dataset entries required for fine-tuning a pre-trained model.
Fine-tuning is an important step to ensure accurate responses
to user queries for the specific application scenario.
parameter size between 30M and 124M, as shown in Table 1,
for pre-training the foundational model. As demonstrated
later, this choice enables the model to perform rapid infer-
ence even on constrained embedded platforms, such as SBCs
which are commonly used as edge devices.
Parameters and resources. We default to a 12-layer model
unless stated otherwise. The training parameters include a
micro-batch size of 64 and a sequence length of 1024. The
model runs over 10 billion tokens for one epoch, approxi-
mately 20,000 steps. The training process requires around
25GB of GPU memory. It was conducted on a single Nvidia
H100 GPU and completed in roughly 9 hours. To ensure
stable training, we incorporated techniques such as learning
rate scheduling—with 700 warm-up steps followed by cosine
decay—and gradient clipping with a maximum norm of 1.0.
3.4
Finetuning of pre-trained custom model
Even with curated datasets, we observed that the pre-trained
model struggles to answer specific user queries [57], even
when similar examples exist within the pre-training data.
Consequently, the model requires an additional fine-tuning
6
TinyLLM: A Framework for Training and Deploying Language Models at the Edge Computers
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Validation
Train
Curated Dataset
Test
Pre-Trained
Model
Fine-tunned Model
Split Dataset
Structured Data 
Acquisition
Data Cleaning 
and Normalising
Annotation and 
Delimitation
 { ### Instruction: The data given
   contains temp, ... ,
   ### Input: 9.00.00, 30.2, 12,
   ### Response: Location Office
   EOT  }, { ... } , { ...} , ...
Time
Temp
Humidity
9.00.00
30.2
12
9.00.05
32.0
57
Time
Temp
Humidity
9.00.00 30.237
12.41
9.00.05 32.005
57.23
Figure 6. Pre-trained foundational models, despite careful dataset curation, often show lower accuracy. Fine-tuning these models
with a small, curated dataset from the target application scenario significantly improves their accuracy. Our TinyLLM framework
supports fine-tuning foundational models for deployment at the edge.
step tailored to the specific application scenario. This step
introduces new queries that the model has not encountered
before and uses these examples to improve its ability to
answer related queries. TinyLLM supports the fine-tuning
of the custom-trained foundational model through several
steps.
The process begins with collecting relevant data for fine-
tuning, requiring structured data formatted as input-output
pairs. Each entry includes an input query and the expected
output from the model based on the provided input. To opti-
mize token usage and fit within the model’s limited context
window, we apply min-max normalization to reduce the
character count. Each dataset entry used in the process must
be formatted according to predefined prompt templates. We
adopt the Alpaca model template [51], which consists of
three components: an instruction that describes the task, an
input that provides additional context, and a response that
completes the request, as illustrated in Figure 5. Each prompt
must include relevant context within the prompt entry, thus
ensuring a coherent input-output pair. The next step involves
shuffling the dataset entries and splitting them into training,
validation, and test sets. The split ratio depends on the size
and nature of the data (e.g., 80% training, 10% validation, and
10% test). This step ensures the model generalizes better by
preventing overfitting to any specific order in the data. The
final step involves the fine-tuning process.
Various techniques are available for fine-tuning, including
PEFT (Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning). PEFT methods are
popular because they allow users to train only a fraction
of the model’s parameters, significantly reducing the mem-
ory footprint compared to full model fine-tuning. One such
method is LoRA (Low-Rank Adaptation) [21], which requires
setting the adapter size and other parameters. As a result,
we employ LoRA as part of the TinyLLM framework.
The key parameters for fine-tuning are the number of fine-
tuning steps (or epochs), batch size, learning rate (which
must be carefully tuned to prevent overfitting or under-
fitting), and dropout rates to control model regularization.
Specifically for LoRA, the parameters include the adapter
size, which determines how much the model adapts to new in-
formation; the rank of adaptation, which specifies the layers
of the model affected by fine-tuning; and the scaling factor,
which controls the contribution of various parameters.
Post-Fine-Tuning Evaluation:. Once fine-tuning is com-
plete, the model generates domain-specific responses by pass-
ing queries using the template employed during training.
3.5
Implementation
Embedded sensing applications often do not produce suffi-
cient data to train a language model independently. General
information must also be incorporated to enhance interac-
tion through natural language prompts with such special-
ized models. We curated a base dataset of over 9 billion
tokens from publicly available sources, which can be com-
bined with user-provided datasets for pre-training the foun-
dational model. This addresses scenarios where the available
data from the user is limited. Specifically, we utilized the
Fineweb dataset [39], selecting 9 billion tokens from a collec-
tion of over 15 trillion tokens compiled from CommonCrawl
dumps since 2013. Additionally, we incorporated the SHL
dataset [18], which contains annotated data collected via
smartphone sensors (e.g., accelerometers, gyroscopes, mag-
netometers, barometers, GPS) for human activity recognition
across activities like walking, running, sitting, and driving.
To further enhance the dataset, we included the ExtraSen-
sory dataset [55], which comprises multi-sensor data from
60 participants over several days, totaling 300,000 minutes
of activity and environmental context (e.g., walking, sitting,
outdoors, at home) sampled every minute.
The mixed dataset integrates Fineweb and sensor datasets
in user-defined proportions, totaling 9 billion tokens. We split
the dataset into training and validation sets using a 98:2 ratio.
For the SHL dataset, we merged sensor values corresponding
to a given timestamp with descriptive prompts followed by
the associated human action. We maintained consistency
by splitting the datasets into 60-65% for training, 20-30% for
testing, and 10-15% for validation.
The Hugging Face Transformers library2 was employed
for fine-tuning. We used LoRA adapters with ranks vary-
ing in powers of 2 (from 16 to 256) and dropout probabili-
ties between 0.1 and 0.3, with gradient accumulation over
2https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/en/index
7
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Viswanadh and Ambuj
six steps. Learning rates ranged from 4𝑒−4 to 6𝑒−4, and the
training steps varied from 100 to 300, using the AdamW
optimizer [12] for fine-tuning. Gradient checkpointing was
enabled, with evaluations performed at each logging step.
The best model, determined by evaluation loss, was saved.
After fine-tuning, the base model was merged with the
LoRA layers and converted to GGUF format, ensuring com-
patibility with the llama.cpp library [16]. This conversion
allows efficient inferencing on various embedded edge plat-
forms through a C++ wrapper.
4
Evaluation
We evaluate the custom foundational models trained using
TinyLLMacross resource-constrained edge platforms. Specif-
ically, we utilize single-board computers with diverse com-
putational capabilities, as illustrated in Figure 8. In these
experiments, we focus on the impact of the pre-training data
on the model’s accuracy for embedded sensing applications.
We compare the performance of our custom model against
state-of-the-art language models, focusing on metrics such
as token generation rate, task completion time, and accuracy.
The key highlights of some of the results are as follows.
• Custom models exhibit improved performance after
careful fine-tuning and incorporating domain-specific
information into the pre-training dataset.
• Custom models achieve better token generation rates
and task completion times than commodity models
• Smaller models can be deployed on resource-constrained
edge platforms, addressing memory limitations that
hinder the deployment of commodity models.
Dataset
Name
Source
# Readings
# Datastreams
# Output
Labels
Gesture
Detection
In-house
630
4
3
Localisation
In-house
350
8
3
Swimming Style
Detection
Brunner et al. [5]
3,730
3
5
Table 2. Datasets used for evaluation. The datasets are split
into 70% for training, 10% for validation, and 20% for testing.
Dataset. Since we target embedded sensing applications as
a case study in this work, we collect relevant datasets to sup-
port such applications. Specifically, we utilize three datasets,
summarized in Table 2. Two datasets—gesture detection and
localization—were collected specifically for this work, while
the swimming style detection dataset was sourced from [5]
and is publicly available. It is worth noting that our frame-
work can easily incorporate any additional datasets.
The custom dataset collected for this work includes 630
instances of hand gesture data captured using the APDS9960
light sensor at a sampling rate of 12.6 Hz, with each gesture
instance lasting 4 seconds. This data was recorded from seven
participants performing gestures under three distinct light
(a)
2x
Red
Green
Blue
Proximity
1x
Single tap 
Double tap 
Hold
Light intensity
Time
(b)
Figure 7. (a) A user performing a hand gesture, and (b) ob-
served light intensity values for different hand gestures.
6.5 cm
3.0 cm
14.6 cm
10.2 cm
Orange Pi Zero 2W
10.0 cm
6.2 cm
Orange Pi 5B
LattePanda Sigma
Computational Power
Figure 8. Embedded platforms for running TinyLLM -trained
models vary in processing and memory capabilities, ranging
from a few hundred megabytes to several gigabytes of RAM.
levels: low (100–200 lux), medium (600–750 lux), and high
(1500–1600 lux), as well as across two distance ranges: close
(2–4 cm) and far (8–10 cm). The gestures included “Single
Tap”, “Double Tap”, and “Hold” (as illustrated in Figure 7),
with an equal number of samples for each gesture class.
The second dataset captures environmental parameters
characterizing various locations within a workspace (illus-
trated in Figure 9). The recorded parameters include temper-
ature (°C), humidity (%), air pressure (hPa), light intensity
(RGB channels), and sound intensity. These measurements
were taken at three distinct indoor locations: the entrance,
the charging station, and the server rack. The dataset con-
tains 350 instances collected using sensors mounted on a
moving robot, with readings taken hourly between 11:00
AM and 5:00 PM over two consecutive days at the respec-
tive locations. The dataset comprises 120 instances each for
the “Charging Station” and “Entrance” locations, and 110
instances for the “Server Rack”.
Finally, the externally sourced dataset, the Swimming
Style Detection Dataset [5], consists of 17 hours of sensor
8
TinyLLM: A Framework for Training and Deploying Language Models at the Edge Computers
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
(a)
Entrance
Charging 
Station
Server
Rack
Sensor data collected
Temperature
Humidity
Air Pressure
Light Intensity
Sound Intensity
(b)
Figure 9. The localisation dataset was created based on data collected from sensors deployed on a moving robot in an indoor
workspace. (a) shows sensors deployed on an indoor robot for sensor-based location detection, and (b)The physical location and
sensor data collected.
data collected from 40 swimmers of varying skill levels. The
data, obtained using the Nixon The Mission3 smartwatch,
includes measurements from an accelerometer, gyroscope,
magnetometer, barometer, and ambient light sensor, sampled
at a frequency of 30 Hz. We utilized only the accelerometer
data for evaluations, comprising three streams representing
movement along the 𝑋, 𝑌, and 𝑍axes. These streams were
segmented into chunks containing 100 readings per stream
(approximately 3 seconds) to create input samples. Each
chunk was annotated with one of five action labels, resulting
in the following class distribution: “Freestyle” (1,504 samples),
“Breaststroke” (285 samples), “Backstroke” (475 samples), “But-
terfly” (222 samples), and “Transition” (1,244 samples).
Pre-training and Fine-tuning Using Custom Models.
We provide a brief overview of the specific steps undertaken
with these datasets for pre-training and fine-tuning model de-
velopment within the TinyLLMframework. For pre-training,
we first created a sensor dataset by processing data from
the Extrasensory [55] and SHL [18] datasets, as illustrated in
Figure 3. This sensor dataset was combined with the Fineweb
dataset, using a 40:60 split (unless explicitly stated otherwise)
to pre-train the custom models for evaluation.
For fine-tuning, we followed the steps outlined in Figure 6.
Due to space constraints, we will only detail this process
for the gesture dataset. The gesture dataset consists of four
time-series data streams: proximity and light intensity (red,
blue, and green channels). For each sample, sensor readings
were concatenated into a text string formatted as follows:
Proximity: [...] \n Red: [...] \n Blue: [...] \n Green: [...]”. The
corresponding output labels included one of three gestures:
Tap”, Double Tap”, and Hold”. The instruction provided was:
“Sensor data values are provided in the following order: prox-
imity, red, green, and blue light intensity values. Using these
sensor values, determine the hand gesture performed. Give your
answer only as Tap, Double Tap, or Hold.”
Experiment setup. We use multiple single-board computers
for deploying custom and off-the-shelf models. This includes
3https://www.nixon.com/ch/en/smart
Latte Panda Sigma [26] (Intel Core i5-1340P, 32 GB RAM,
Ubuntu 20.04.4 LTS), Orange Pi 5 [48] (16GB RAM, Orange
Pi OS), and Orange Pi Zero 2 W [49] (2GB RAM, Orange
Pi OS). We use the llama.cpp [16] library and its metrics
(token generation rate and run time) for the execution and
evaluation of the selected models.
We have set the LLM’s parameters for generating the re-
sponses: temperature (T = 0.7), repeat penalty = 1.1, and
threads (t = 2) to maintain consistency across models and
experiments. In addition to the custom models, we employ
off-the-shelf LLMs and their quantized versions [15] to en-
able comparison. In the quantized versions, model weights
are stored at lower precisions, which reduces the memory
requirements but can also impact the quality of the model’s
responses. Several quantization schemes exist, among which
we used q2_k and q4_k for some of the evaluations. In all
experiments, we conduct ten trials for each configuration
and plot the average value and the standard deviation unless
specified otherwise. We also evaluate model performance us-
ing accuracy, which is the percentage of correctly generated
outputs. Since our prompts follow a specific template, the
correct label is expected within the first few tokens. We check
for the expected word within the first 3–4 tokens (ignoring
line breaks). If it is missing, or if gibberish or incorrect classes
are predicted, the output is classified as incorrect. Accuracy
is calculated as the ratio of correct predictions to the total
number of test cases, then multiplied by 100 for a percentage
score.
4.1
Accuracy of Fine-tuned Custom Models
The custom models, Llama and Phi, are fine-tuned on three
different datasets, and their accuracy is evaluated based on
test data. The quantized versions of the fine-tuned Phi and
Llama models are also evaluated for accuracy. However, the
same analysis could not be performed on the swimming
dataset, as the fine-tuning process for Llama 3 and Phi 3
exceeded 72 hours (3 days) due to the dataset’s higher count
of samples compared to the collected datasets. It can be noted
9
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Viswanadh and Ambuj
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Model Size (GB)
82.5
85.0
87.5
90.0
92.5
95.0
97.5
100.0
Accuracy (%)
P2_q2
P2_q4
P2
L2_q2
L2_q4
L2
P3_q4
P3
L3_q2
L3_q4
L3
C124M
C101M
(a) Gesture dataset
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Model Size (GB)
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
Accuracy (%)
P2_q2
P2_q4
P2
L2_q2
L2_q4
L2
P3_q4
P3
L3_q2
L3_q4
L3
C124M
C101M
C82M
(b) Localisation dataset
Phi 2 (Quant 2)
Phi 2 (Quant 4)
Phi 2
Llama 2 (Quant 2)
Llama 2 (Quant 4)
Llama 2
Phi 3 (Quant 4)
Phi 3
Llama 3 (Quant 2)
Llama 3 (Quant 4)
Llama 3
Custom Model 124M
Custom Model 101M
Custom Model 82M
Figure 10. Compares the accuracy of fine-tuned off-the-shelf models (Phi and Llama) and custom models across (a) gesture and (b)
localisation datasets, as a function of model size. The plots show that larger models do not always achieve high accuracy. In several
cases, a smaller custom model achieves comparable or better performance than the larger model
that Phi 3_q2 is not plotted as it achieved zero accuracy, as
it repeatedly generated irrelevant outputs (mostly repeating
the prompt).
Insights. As shown in Figure 10 the accuracy of the custom
models, Llama, and Phi models fine-tuned with the collected
datasets. Notably, the smaller custom models perform on par
with or better than the larger models. Among the datasets,
higher accuracy is observed for the localization dataset, sug-
gesting that the gesture dataset poses more challenges. For
the gesture dataset, Llama 2 outperforms Llama 3, while
Phi 3 consistently performs well across both datasets, with
Phi 2 following closely. Phi models performed better than
Llama models, which can be attributed to their pre-training
data being more focused on computer programming (coding)
datasets, enhancing their ability to handle sensor data as
well.
4.2
Different Pre-training Datasets
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Split
0
20
40
60
80
100
Accuracy
Preferred Split
(a) Gesture
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Split
0
20
40
60
80
100
Accuracy
Preferred Split
(b) Localisation
Figure 11. Compares the accuracy of fine-tuned custom models
(124M) on the (a) gesture and (b) localization datasets. The
models are pre-trained on varying splits of sensor data and
general web data, with a split of 0 indicating training solely
on web data and a split of 1 indicating training exclusively on
the sensor dataset. The shaded region highlights the preferred
data split.
With the sensor dataset created earlier, we merged the
Fineweb dataset to generate a series of mixed datasets in
varying proportions, ranging from 0 (only Fineweb dataset)
to 1 (only sensor dataset) in increments of 0.1. Then, a cus-
tom 124M model is pre-trained on these datasets separately
and subsequently fine-tuned separately on gesture and local-
ization datasets.Figure 11a and 11b show the accuracy of the
fine-tuned 124M parameter model, pre-trained on varying
splits of sensor and web data. It can be observed that an
almost equal mix of web and sensor data yields the high-
est accuracy (marked in blue). For both tasks, performance
declines significantly as the data split shifts towards either
extreme (i.e., pure web or pure sensor data).
Insights. This suggests that a balanced dataset improves
model performance for sensor data-specific applications like
gesture recognition and localization. A notable spike in ac-
curacy is observed with the localization dataset when the
split is 0.9, which occurred because the model consistently re-
turned the same output label for all input prompts, artificially
inflating the accuracy to 33%.
4.3
Varied Custom Model Parameter
30
51
80
101
124
Model Parameters (millions)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Accuracy (%)
Gesture Dataset
Localisation Dataset
Swimming Dataset
Figure 12. The accuracy of sensor data analysis increases with
the model’s parameter size. Notably, even smaller models with
fewer than 100 million parameters achieve high accuracy.
In evaluating the performance of custom models on resource-
constrained platforms, we employ models with varying pa-
rameters (30M to 124M), fine-tuned on the datasets discussed
10
TinyLLM: A Framework for Training and Deploying Language Models at the Edge Computers
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
30
50
80
100
124
Model Parameters (millions)
0
100
200
300
400
Tokens per Second
24.93
17.20
11.65
8.85
7.37
25.38
15.83
10.61
8.87
7.56
SBC - Model Combination
Latte Panda Sigma - Fine-tuned
Latte Panda Sigma - Original
Orange Pi 5 - Fine-tuned
Orange Pi 5 - Original
Orange Pi Zero 2W - Fine-tuned
Orange Pi Zero 2W - Original
Figure 13. Shows the variation of evaluation tokens per second
when prompted with a gesture recognition prompt. The lowest
token generation rate is comparable to the average human
typing speed, demonstrating that custom models achieve rea-
sonable performance, even on resource-constrained platforms.
above. We evaluate performance based on accuracy, infer-
ence time, and tokens per second. Figure 12 shows the accu-
racy of smaller models across the three datasets considered.
We observe that accuracy generally improves as the num-
ber of model parameters increases, although some minor
exceptions exist. Notably, the 30M and 50M models perform
poorly on the gesture dataset, with the custom 30M model
achieving zero accuracy. Figure 13 shows the variation of
token generation rate with the number of parameters of ges-
ture fine-tuned custom models. We observe that models with
fewer parameters achieve higher tokens per second rates
compared to larger models or those with higher parameter
counts. Additionally, the token generation rate decreases as
the computational power of the device decreases. Figure 14
shows the inference time with varied model parameter sizes
across custom and off-the-shelf models.
0
2
4
6
8
Model Parameters (billions)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Inference Time (ms)
Phi - 2
Phi - 3
Llama - 2
Llama - 3
0.05
0.10
0.15
2
4
6
8
10
C30M
C51M
C82M
C101M
C124M
Figure 14. Smaller models enable rapid inference. TinyLLM
-trained models significantly improve inference time while
maintaining high accuracy for the sensor data analysis.
Insights. Smaller models achieve higher token generation
rates and reduced inference times, presenting a trade-off
with accuracy.
As shown in Figure 12 for the swimming dataset, while
the maximum accuracy achieved was 93.1%, the highest F1-
score recorded was 0.78, which is lower than the 0.97 F1-score
reported in [5]. It is important to note that we only used 3
datastreams (accelerometer readings along X, Y, and Z) out
of the 11 provided in the dataset, due to the limited window
context of the smaller models used in this study.
4.4
Multiple Active Instances
1
2
3
4
5
6
Number of Instances
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Tokens per Second
10.81
8.30
6.26
5.65
4.73
4.02
5.42
3.33
2.39
1.81
1.47
1.27
6.16
4.57
3.35
2.92
2.53
1.99
2.88
1.95
1.45
1.17
0.88
0.76
Models
Custom Model
Phi-3
Phi-3_q4
Llama-3
Llama-3_q4
Figure 15. Shows the variation of evaluation tokens per sec-
ond when multiple instances of the same LLM are running
simultaneously on LattePanda Sigma.
We evaluate the impact of running multiple concurrent
instances of the same model on the token generation rate.
We use the sample prompt: "How to interface a sensor to a
micro-controller? Explain in great detail." and set the number
of new tokens to generate to 𝑛= 300, deploying the models
on LattePanda Sigma.As shown in Figure 15, we observed
that across all models, the overall token generation rate de-
creases as the number of active instances increases. This rate
reduction is more pronounced in larger models compared to
smaller ones.
Insights. Notably, the custom model exhibits a significantly
higher token generation rate due to its smaller size, which
may allow multiple custom models specialized for differ-
ent sensor data-related tasks to operate concurrently on
resource-constrained devices without significantly compro-
mising performance.
4.5
Varied Background Load
We evaluate the impact of background load on task com-
pletion time. To do this, we actively prompt a single model
while multiple models are loaded into the memory of the Lat-
tePanda Sigma. We employ custom and off-the-shelf models
fine-tuned on the localisation dataset, using a localisation-
based prompt, and set the number of new tokens to generate
to 𝑛= 9. We consider three different background loads based
on the inactive models: High (three instances of Llama-3),
Low (three instances of Phi-3), and None (no inactive LLMs
loaded).As shown in Figure 16, we observe that the back-
ground load from inactive LLM instances has little to no
impact on the time taken to achieve a task-inferring location.
Insights. The time taken by the custom model to perform
the task is significantly less (over 70 times) than the time
taken by other models for the same task across all back-
ground load conditions considered. This complements the
11
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Viswanadh and Ambuj
Custom
Phi3_q2
Phi3_q4
Llama3_q2
Llama3_q4
Llama3
Active Model
0
10
20
30
40
50
Time (s)
0.53
0.52
0.54
Background Load
High
Low
None
Figure 16. Displays the total time taken by different models for
inferring location under various background load conditions on
the LattePanda Sigma. Custom models significantly outperform
the other models by completing the inference task within a
second.
results of the previous experiment, which showed that the
custom model had a significantly higher token generation
rate.
4.6
Multiple Edge platforms
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Number of Instances
0
20
40
60
80
100
Tokens per Second
5.71
5.22
3.30
2.35
1.91
1.59
1.37
1.16
SBC
Latte Panda Sigma
Orange Pi 5
Orange Pi Zero 2W
Figure 17. The smaller size of these models enables concurrent
loading of multiple specialized models. Their token generation
rates show they maintain efficient inference speeds even when
running multiple instances simultaneously.
We evaluated the performance of the custom model on
different single-board computers and assessed it based on av-
erage tokens per second and the impact of running multiple
concurrent instances of the same model. We used a custom
model fine-tuned on the localisation dataset, with a localisa-
tion based prompt and a new tokens generated parameter set
to 𝑛= 4. As shown in Figure 17, we observe that while the
token generation rate decreases with an increasing number
of concurrent instances on the SBC, it maintains a reason-
able rate. Although the custom model can be deployed on all
the SBCs considered, we observe a steep drop in the token
generation rate when moving to more resource-constrained
devices. This drop is due to the decreasing computing power
of the processors in the SBCs.
Insights. Even in highly constrained devices such as the
Orange Pi Zero 2W, on which the considered off-the-shelf
models cannot be deployed, the custom model achieves a
token rate of approximately 6 tokens per second, comparable
to the average typing speed of humans.
5
Limitations and Discussion
Model Architectures. Currently, the framework supports
only pre-training of GPT-2 based architectures, although
fine-tuning supports many other models.
Context Window length. The input prompt size is cur-
rently limited to 1024, which might limit the applicability of
some usecases consisting of longer prompts
Here, the smaller models (below 120M) are scaled down
from the 124M parameter model by reducing the number of
transformer blocks but maintaining the relation 𝐶= 64𝑙as
shown in Table 1. However, it might be interesting to explore
the training of smaller models created by varying 𝐶and 𝑙
without constraining.
6
Related Work
Sensing and Models. While it is widely known that LLMs
excel at language-based tasks, various attempts are made
to test LLMs on different modalities like images, audio, and
time-series data. There are significant advancements in au-
dio and image domains [9, 10]. Time-series as input to LLMs
still remains a bigger challenge to be solved, although there
are many works aimed that have had decent progress [20].
Advances in this benefit many domains like medical [28]
and sensor data analysis [60], which primarily contain time-
series data from sensors. Mo et al. [34] makes LLMs com-
prehend sensory data by modifying the LLM’s architecture.
A new multisensory multi-task adapter layer is introduced,
making the model capable of perceiving eight IoT tasks.
LLMs and Programming. Recent years have seen growing
interest in using LLMs in the software development process.
They demonstrate an increasing ability to generate relevant
code from natural language prompts. LLMs are also used
for other coding tasks like completion, syntax correction,
and refactoring. These capabilities have led to surprising re-
sults: AlphaDev [30], for instance, discovered a faster sorting
algorithm that surpasses previously known human bench-
marks. Meta’s LLM Compiler [32], designed for compiler
optimization, is another breakthrough by enhancing code
generation efficiency and aims to optimize code for better
performance and resource utilization. Consequently, along-
side larger, cloud-based LLMs such as ChatGPT and Claude,
smaller LLMs designed specifically for coding tasks have also
emerged. Examples include CodeLlama [45], StarCoder [27],
Codestral [33], DeepSeek Coder [7], and CodeBERT [13].
Many of these LLMs are now part of commercial products,
including GitHub CoPilot4 and OpenAI Codex5. TinyLLM
4https://github.com/features/copilot
5https://openai.com/index/openai-codex/
12
TinyLLM: A Framework for Training and Deploying Language Models at the Edge Computers
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
is complementary to these systems and can utilize LLMs
optimized for coding purposes.
7
Conclusion
TinyLLM enables the pre-training and fine-tuning small lan-
guage models on custom user data. The framework supports
deploying models at the edge, ranging between 30M and
124M parameters. Our results show that these smaller models
can match or even surpass the performance of much larger
models across various applications. Incorporating domain-
specific pre-training data further enhances their effective-
ness. This framework takes a step towards deploying smaller,
domain-adapted language models optimized for edge com-
puting to support embedded sensing applications.
8
Acknowledgements
This work is funded by a grant from NUS-NCS Joint Cen-
ter (A-0008542-02-00). It is also supported by a startup grant
(A-8000277-00-00), a MoE Tier 1 grant (A-8001661-00-00)
and an unrestricted gift from Google through their Research
Scholar Program (A-8002307-00-00), hosted at NUS.
References
[1] Marah Abdin, Jyoti Aneja, Hany Awadalla, Ahmed Awadallah, et al.
Phi-3 Technical Report: A Highly Capable Language Model Locally
on Your Phone, 2024.
[2] Anthropic AI. The Claude 3 Model Family: Opus, Sonnet, Haiku, 2023.
Accessed: 2024-06-24.
[3] Beelink. Beelink EQ13 N100, 2024. Accessed: 2024-10-23.
[4] Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared
Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam,
Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss,
Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse,
Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess,
Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya
Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language Models are Few-Shot Learn-
ers, 2020.
[5] Gino Brunner, Darya Melnyk, Birkir Sigfússon, and Roger Wattenhofer.
Swimming style recognition and lap counting using a smartwatch and
deep learning. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM International Symposium
on Wearable Computers, ISWC ’19, page 23–31, New York, NY, USA,
2019. Association for Computing Machinery.
[6] Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes
Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar, Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li,
Scott Lundberg, Harsha Nori, Hamid Palangi, Marco Tulio Ribeiro, and
Yi Zhang. Sparks of Artificial General Intelligence: Early experiments
with GPT-4, 2023.
[7] DeepSeek-AI, Qihao Zhu, Daya Guo, Zhihong Shao, et al. Deepseek-
coder-v2: Breaking the barrier of closed-source models in code intelli-
gence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11931, 2024.
[8] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova.
Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language
understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
[9] Linhao Dong, Shuang Xu, and Bo Xu. Speech-transformer: A no-
recurrence sequence-to-sequence model for speech recognition. In
2018 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP), pages 5884–5888, 2018.
[10] Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weis-
senborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani,
Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszkoreit,
and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for
image recognition at scale, 2021.
[11] Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Ka-
dian, et al. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024.
[12] Hugging Face.
AdamW Optimizer.
https://huggingface.co/docs/
bitsandbytes/main/en/reference/optim/adamw, 2024. Accessed: 2024-
05-20.
[13] Zhangyin Feng, Daya Guo, Duyu Tang, Nan Duan, Xiaocheng Feng,
Ming Gong, Linjun Shou, Bing Qin, Ting Liu, Daxin Jiang, and Ming
Zhou. Codebert: A pre-trained model for programming and natural
languages, 2020.
[14] Matt Fredrikson, Somesh Jha, and Thomas Ristenpart. Model Inversion
Attacks that Exploit Confidence Information and Basic Countermea-
sures. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer
and Communications Security, CCS ’15, page 1322–1333, New York,
NY, USA, 2015. Association for Computing Machinery.
[15] Georgi Gerganov. Description of Quantization Types in llama.cpp.
https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp/pull/1684, 2024. Accessed:
2024-05-20.
[16] Georgi Gerganov. Llama.cpp. https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp,
2024. Accessed: 2024-05-20.
[17] Amir Gholami, Zhewei Yao, Sehoon Kim, Coleman Hooper, Michael W.
Mahoney, and Kurt Keutzer.
AI and Memory Wall . IEEE Micro,
44(03):33–39, May 2024.
[18] Hristijan Gjoreski, Mathias Ciliberto, Lin Wang, Francisco Javier Or-
donez Morales, Sami Mekki, Stefan Valentin, and Daniel Roggen. The
university of sussex-huawei locomotion and transportation dataset for
multimodal analytics with mobile devices. IEEE Access, 6:42592–42604,
2018.
[19] Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena
Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas,
Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, Tom Hennigan,
Eric Noland, Katie Millican, George van den Driessche, Bogdan Damoc,
Aurelia Guy, Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Erich Elsen, Jack W.
Rae, Oriol Vinyals, and Laurent Sifre. Training Compute-Optimal
Large Language Models, 2022.
[20] Aritra Hota, Soumyajit Chatterjee, and Sandip Chakraborty. Eval-
uating large language models as virtual annotators for time-series
physical sensing data, 2024.
[21] Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi
Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adapta-
tion of large language models. In International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2022.
[22] Cheng-Zhi Anna Huang, Ashish Vaswani, Jakob Uszkoreit, Noam
Shazeer, Ian Simon, Curtis Hawthorne, Andrew M. Dai, Matthew D.
Hoffman, Monica Dinculescu, and Douglas Eck. Music Transformer,
2018.
[23] Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bam-
ford, and other. Mistral 7B, 2023.
[24] Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B. Brown, Ben-
jamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and
Dario Amodei. Scaling Laws for Neural Language Models, 2020.
[25] Sehoon Kim, Coleman Hooper, Amir Gholami, Zhen Dong, Xiuyu Li,
Sheng Shen, Michael W. Mahoney, and Kurt Keutzer. SqueezeLLM:
Dense-and-Sparse Quantization, 2024.
[26] LattePanda Team. Lattepanda sigma, 2024. Accessed: 2024-10-23.
[27] Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Yangtian Zi, Niklas Muennighoff, et al.
Starcoder: may the source be with you!, 2023.
[28] Xin Liu, Daniel McDuff, Geza Kovacs, Isaac Galatzer-Levy, Jacob Sun-
shine, Jiening Zhan, Ming-Zher Poh, Shun Liao, Paolo Di Achille, and
Shwetak Patel. Large language models are few-shot health learners,
13
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Viswanadh and Ambuj
2023.
[29] Shuming Ma, Hongyu Wang, Lingxiao Ma, Lei Wang, Wenhui Wang,
Shaohan Huang, Li Dong, Ruiping Wang, Jilong Xue, and Furu Wei.
The era of 1-bit llms: All large language models are in 1.58 bits, 2024.
[30] Daniel J. Mankowitz et al. Faster sorting algorithms discovered using
deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 618(7964):257–263, 2023.
[31] Joshua Maynez, Shashi Narayan, Bernd Bohnet, and Ryan McDon-
ald. On faithfulness and factuality in abstractive summarization. In
Dan Jurafsky, Joyce Chai, Natalie Schluter, and Joel Tetreault, editors,
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 1906–1919, Online, July 2020. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
[32] Meta AI. Meta large language model compiler: Foundation models of
compiler optimization, 2024. Accessed: 2024-06-30.
[33] Mistral AI. Codestral: Hello, world!, 2024. Accessed: 2024-06-30.
[34] Shentong Mo, Russ Salakhutdinov, Louis-Philippe Morency, and
Paul Pu Liang. Iot-lm: Large multisensory language models for the
internet of things, 2024.
[35] OpenAI. ChatGPT (June 2024 version). https://www.openai.com/
chatgpt, 2024. Accessed: 2024-06-24.
[36] OpenAI. OpenAI Model Pricing, 2024. Accessed: 2024-10-02.
[37] OpenAI, Josh Achiam, et al. Gpt-4 technical report, 2024.
[38] David Patterson, Joseph Gonzalez, Quoc Le, Chen Liang, Lluis-Miquel
Munguia, Daniel Rothchild, David So, Maud Texier, and Jeff Dean.
Carbon Emissions and Large Neural Network Training, 2021.
[39] Guilherme Penedo et al. FineWeb, 04 2024.
[40] D. Puccinelli and M. Haenggi. Wireless sensor networks: applica-
tions and challenges of ubiquitous sensing. IEEE Circuits and Systems
Magazine, 5(3):19–31, 2005.
[41] Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and
Ilya Sutskever. Language Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners.
2019.
[42] Raspberry Pi Foundation. Raspberry Pi, 2024. Accessed: 2024-06-20.
[43] Microsoft Research. Phi-2: The Surprising Power of Small Language
Models. https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/blog/phi-2-the-
surprising-power-of-small-language-models/, 2023. Accessed: 2024-
06-24.
[44] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser,
and Björn Ommer. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffu-
sion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pages 10684–10695, 2022.
[45] Baptiste Roziere, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat,
Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi Adi, Jingyu Liu, Tal Remez, Jérémy Rapin,
et al. Code llama: Open foundation models for code. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.12950, 2023.
[46] Anian Ruoss, Grégoire Delétang, Sourabh Medapati, Jordi Grau-
Moya, Li Kevin Wenliang, Elliot Catt, John Reid, and Tim Genewein.
Grandmaster-level chess without search, 2024.
[47] Siddharth Samsi, Dan Zhao, Joseph McDonald, Baolin Li, Adam
Michaleas, Michael Jones, William Bergeron, Jeremy Kepner, Devesh
Tiwari, and Vijay Gadepally. From Words to Watts: Benchmarking the
Energy Costs of Large Language Model Inference. In 2023 IEEE High
Performance Extreme Computing Conference (HPEC), pages 1–9, 2023.
[48] Shenzhen Xunlong Software CO., Limited. Orange Pi 5, 2022. Accessed:
2024-06-12.
[49] Shenzhen Xunlong Software CO., Limited. Orange Pi Zero 2W, 2022.
Accessed: 2024-07-01.
[50] Vidya Srinivas, Malek Itani, Tuochao Chen, Sefik Emre Eskimez,
Takuya Yoshioka, and Shyamnath Gollakota. Knowledge boosting
during low-latency inference, 2024.
[51] Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen
Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Stanford
Alpaca: An Instruction-following LLaMA model. https://github.com/
tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca, 2023.
[52] Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, et al. Gemini: A Family of Highly Capable
Multimodal Models, 2024.
[53] Gemma Team, Thomas Mesnard, et al. Gemma: Open Models Based
on Gemini Research and Technology, 2024.
[54] Hugo Touvron et al. LLaMA 2: Open Foundation and Fine-Tuned Chat
Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
[55] Yonatan Vaizman, Katherine Ellis, and Gert Lanckriet. Recognizing de-
tailed human context in the wild from smartphones and smartwatches.
IEEE Pervasive Computing, 16(4):62–74, 2017.
[56] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion
Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention
Is All You Need, 2023.
[57] Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y. Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei
Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du, Andrew M. Dai, and Quoc V. Le. Finetuned
language models are zero-shot learners, 2022.
[58] Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebas-
tian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald
Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol Vinyals, Percy Liang,
Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. Emergent Abilities of Large Language
Models, 2022.
[59] Guangxuan Xiao, Ji Lin, Mickael Seznec, Hao Wu, Julien Demouth,
and Song Han. SmoothQuant: Accurate and Efficient Post-Training
Quantization for Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the 40th
International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceed-
ings of Machine Learning Research, pages 38087–38099. PMLR, 23–29
Jul 2023.
[60] Huatao Xu, Liying Han, Qirui Yang, Mo Li, and Mani Srivastava. Pene-
trative ai: Making llms comprehend the physical world. In Proceedings
of the 25th International Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and
Applications, HOTMOBILE ’24, page 1–7, New York, NY, USA, 2024.
Association for Computing Machinery.
[61] Ziwei Xu, Sanjay Jain, and Mohan Kankanhalli.
Hallucination is
Inevitable: An Innate Limitation of Large Language Models, 2024.
[62] Jinliang Yuan, Chen Yang, et al. Mobile foundation model as firmware.
In Proceedings of the 30th Annual International Conference on Mobile
Computing and Networking, ACM MobiCom ’24, page 279–295, New
York, NY, USA, 2024. Association for Computing Machinery.
[63] Zixuan Zhou, Xuefei Ning, Ke Hong, Tianyu Fu, Jiaming Xu, Shiyao
Li, Yuming Lou, Luning Wang, Zhihang Yuan, Xiuhong Li, Shengen
Yan, Guohao Dai, Xiao-Ping Zhang, Yuhan Dong, and Yu Wang. A
Survey on Efficient Inference for Large Language Models, 2024.
14
