Digital Communications and Networks(DCN)
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/dcan
Towards 6G Native-AI Edge Networks: A
Semantic-Aware and Agentic Intelligence
Paradigm
Chenyuan Feng1, Anbang Zhang2, Geyong Min1, Yongming Huang3,4,
Tony Q. S. Quek4,5,∗, Xiaohu You3,4,∗
1 College of Computer Science, University of Exeter, Exeter, U.K.
2 Sony China Research Laboratory, Beijing, China
3 School of Information Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
4 Purple Mountain Laboratories, Nanjing, China
5 Information System Technology and Design Pillar, Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
∗Corresponding Author
Abstract
The evolution toward sixth-generation (6G) wireless systems positions intelligence as a native network capability, fundamen-
tally transforming the design of radio access networks (RANs). Within this vision, Semantic-native communication (SemCom)
and agentic intelligence are expected to play central roles. SemCom departs from bit-level fidelity and instead emphasizes
task-oriented meaning exchange, enabling compact semantic representations and introducing new performance measures such
as semantic fidelity and task success rate (TSR). Agentic intelligence endows distributed RAN entities with goal-driven auton-
omy, reasoning, planning, and multi-agent collaboration, increasingly supported by foundation models and knowledge graphs.
In this work, we first introduce the conceptual foundations of SemCom and agentic networking, and discuss why existing AI-
driven O-RAN solutions remain largely bit-centric and task-siloed. We then present a unified taxonomy that organizes recent
research along three axes: i) semantic abstraction level (symbol/feature/intent/knowledge), ii) agent autonomy and coordina-
tion granularity (single-, multi-, and hierarchical-agent), and iii) RAN control placement across PHY/MAC, near-real-time RIC,
and non-real-time RIC. Based on this taxonomy, we systematically introduce enabling technologies including task-oriented se-
mantic encoders/decoders, multi-agent reinforcement learning, foundation-model-assisted RAN agents, and knowledge-graph-
based reasoning for cross-layer awareness. Representative 6G use cases, such as immersive XR, vehicular V2X, and industrial
digital twins, are analyzed to illustrate the semantic–agentic convergence in practice. Finally, we identify open challenges in
semantic representation standardization, scalable trustworthy agent coordination, O-RAN interoperability, and energy-efficient
AI deployment, and outline research directions toward operational semantic–agentic AI-RAN.
KEYWORDS: AI Edge, Radio Access Network, Semantic Communication, Agentic Networks, 6G Native-AI Communication
1. Introduction
The sixth generation (6G) of wireless communica-
tion networks is expected to go beyond terabit-per-
second data rates and sub-millisecond latency, and
to serve as an intelligence-native, knowledge-driven
∗Corresponding author: Tony Q. S. Quek and Xiaohu You.
1(email: tonyquek@sutd.edu.sg, xhyu@seu.edu.cn).
2(This work has been submitted to the Elseview for possible pub-
lication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which
this version may no longer be accessible. ).
infrastructure supporting emerging services such as
holographic extended reality (XR), industrial digi-
tal twins, massive Internet-of-Things (IoT), and au-
tonomous vehicular networks [1, 2, 3, 4]. In contrast
to previous generations where AI plays an auxiliary
role, 6G envisions learning, reasoning, and decision-
making embedded across the protocol stack, enabling
a self-evolving radio access network (RAN) [5, 6, 7].
Despite this vision, current RAN operation and AI-
enabled O-RAN controllers remain largely rooted in a
bit-centric Shannon abstraction, optimizing through-
arXiv:2512.04405v1  [eess.SP]  4 Dec 2025
2
C. Feng, et al.
put, bit error rate (BER), or quality of service (QoS)
without explicitly accounting for the meaning or task
relevance of exchanged information [8, 9]. This mis-
match is particularly pronounced for task-oriented ser-
vices, where achieving the correct intent or outcome
is more important than exact symbol recovery. Se-
mantic communication (SemCom) addresses this gap
by transmitting compact, task-relevant semantic repre-
sentations and by evaluating performance via semantic
fidelity and task success rate (TSR), rather than solely
bit-level metrics [10, 11, 12].
In parallel, the scale and heterogeneity anticipated
in 6G RAN, including ultra-dense deployments, dy-
namic spectrum sharing, and tightly coupled cross-
layer interactions, render purely centralized intelli-
gence increasingly unsustainable.
Network entities
such as base stations, edge servers, and user devices
thus need to evolve into autonomous, goal-driven
agents capable of local perception, reasoning, plan-
ning, and multi-agent coordination. This agentic intel-
ligence paradigm provides proactive and scalable con-
trol, complementing SemCom by determining what
semantic information to exchange, when to exchange
it, and at what abstraction level.
Recent advances have produced promising Sem-
Com prototypes and distributed learning approaches
for wireless networks, while AI-driven O-RAN has
introduced open interfaces and hierarchical RAN In-
telligent Controllers (near-RT and non-RT RICs) that
facilitate xApp/rApp deployment [13]. However, sev-
eral gaps hinder the realization of a task-effective,
scalable 6G AI-RAN: (i) most SemCom designs are
domain-specific, offering limited reusability across
tasks and lacking standardized semantic representa-
tions or fidelity metrics; (ii) existing RIC-based AI
solutions typically target narrow functions and face
scalability challenges when coordinating many au-
tonomous agents; (iii) trust, explainability, and secu-
rity for distributed agent decisions remain underdevel-
oped; and (iv) energy- and latency-aware deployment
of large semantic/agentic models is still challenging.
These
gaps
motivate
an
integrated
view
of
semantic-aware and agentic AI-RAN for 6G. This
work systematically reviews how SemCom and agen-
tic intelligence can be jointly designed and deployed
within the O-RAN architecture to enable a closed-
loop, self-evolving Native-AI RAN. The main con-
tributions are summarized as follows.
(i) Concep-
tual unification of semantic and agentic AI-RAN: We
articulate a 6G Native-AI RAN paradigm where se-
mantic representations and autonomous agents form a
closed-loop self-evolving system, and clarify the roles
of semantic fidelity and TSR as task-level KPIs. (ii)
A three-axis taxonomy for semantic–agentic research:
We propose a unified taxonomy along semantic ab-
straction level →agent autonomy/coordination gran-
ularity →RAN control placement (PHY/MAC, near-
RT RIC, non-RT RIC), enabling systematic compar-
ison of existing works.
(iii) Summary of enabling
technologies: We review key technical enablers in-
cluding task-oriented semantic encoder/decoder de-
sign and metrics, scalable multi-agent learning and
negotiation, foundation-model-augmented (planning-
oriented) agents, and knowledge-graph-based cross-
layer reasoning and orchestration. (iv) Use cases and
evaluation perspectives: We map semantic–agentic
methods to representative 6G services (XR, V2X, dig-
ital twins, edge intelligence), and summarize datasets,
benchmarks, and task-level KPIs beyond conventional
BER and throughput. (v) Open challenges and stan-
dardization directions: We identify high-impact open
issues in semantic representation/metric standardiza-
tion, scalable and trustworthy multi-agent control, in-
teroperability with O-RAN interfaces, and energy-
aware AI design, and outline potential evolution paths
for future standardization.
2. Key Evolving Techniques in 6G Native-AI RAN
Research toward 6G Native-AI RAN is converg-
ing along two historically separate threads:
Sem-
Com, which redefines the communication abstrac-
tion from bits to meaning, and agentic intelligence,
which equips distributed RAN entities with goal-
driven autonomy.
Existing studies typically exam-
ine these threads in isolation—e.g., focusing on end-
to-end semantic encoders/decoders or on MARL-
based RAN control—while practical deployments are
largely rooted in AI-assisted O-RAN controllers[29,
30, 31, 32]. To systematically organize the state of
the art, we review prior work through the lens of our
three-axis taxonomy: semantic abstraction level, agent
autonomy/coordination granularity, and RAN control
placement. We review prior works through three axes
shown in Table 1.
(1) SemCom by Abstraction Level: Early Sem-
Com for wireless networks originated from deep joint
source–channel coding (JSCC), where neural end-to-
end pipelines were trained to reconstruct text or im-
ages under channel impairments [15]. These works
operate mainly at the symbol/feature semantic level,
encoding modality-specific latent features to reduce
redundancy. More recent advances extend semantic
models toward intent- and task-level semantics, en-
abling task-oriented transmission for cross-modal ser-
vices such as XR, digital twins, and V2X, where pre-
serving meaning is more important than exact bit re-
covery [33]. In parallel, a growing literature explores
semantic distortion and task metrics beyond BER, in-
cluding semantic fidelity and TSR, which serve as
application-aligned KPIs for semantic networks [10,
11, 12]. Despite rapid progress, most semantic pro-
totypes remain domain-specific and lack standardized
semantic representations and metrics, limiting interop-
erability and large-scale adoption.
Towards 6G Native-AI Edge Networks: A Semantic-Aware and Agentic Intelligence Paradigm
3
Table 1
Taxonomy of Semantic–Agentic AI-RAN for 6G Native-AI Networks.
Axis
Sub-category
Definition / What it captures
Typical inputs / outputs
Representative
methods
Evaluation KPIs
(Axis-1)
Semantic
abstraction
level
(L0)
Bit/Symbol
Classical bit-centric RAN
optimization; no semantic
awareness.
Raw bits/symbols →bits.
Shannon-based
PHY/MAC; bit-centric
RIC/xApps.
BER/BLER,
SINR,
throughput.
(L1) Fea-
ture/Latent
Modality-specific latent feature
exchange to remove redundancy;
task-aware but not intent-aware.
Images/text/speech →
latent embeddings.
Deep JSCC;
task-oriented semantic
coding [14, 15].
Semantic fidelity,
TSR, reconstruc-
tion/task
accuracy.
(L2)
Intent/Task
Transmit intent, goal, or task
state; semantics tied to
downstream task success.
Intent/labels/BEV →task
tokens.
multi-modal / generative
SemCom with
foundation models
[16, 17, 18].
TSR, task
accuracy,
latency-per-task.
(L3) Knowl-
edge/Graph
Semantics represented as
structured knowledge (KG/scene
graph) enabling
reasoning/explainability.
KG triples/graphs →
KG/intent.
KG-aided SemCom /
KG semantic reasoning
[19, 20].
TSR +
explainability /
constraint
satisfaction.
(Axis-2)
Agent
autonomy &
coordination
granularity
(G0)
Non-agentic
Centralized/offline optimization
without autonomous agents.
Global state →policy.
Conventional
optimization /
supervised DL.
Convergence, bit
KPIs.
(G1)
Single-agent
One agent controls a cell/cluster;
no explicit inter-agent
negotiation.
Local KPIs/state →action.
RL for schedul-
ing/power/mobility [21].
Local utility,
stability.
(G2)
Multi-agent
Multiple agents coordinate via
CTDE / negotiation for scalable
RAN control.
Distributed obs →joint
actions.
MARL for multi-cell
RA/mobility/slicing
[22, 23].
Sum-utility,
fairness,
TSR-aware
reward.
(G3)
Hierarchical /
Agentic
Agents have roles/levels
(planner–executor); may use
LLM tools/KG context.
Intent + context →plans +
actions.
LLM-/tool-augmented
RIC agents, LLM agents
mainly for planning
(non-RT/slow near-RT),
not sub-ms execution.
[24, 25, 26, 27].
Goal satisfaction,
robustness, trust.
(Axis-3)
RAN control
placement
(P0)
PHY/MAC
local loop
Sub-ms to ms control at BS/UE;
strict realtime constraints.
CSI/KPIs →PHY/MAC
actions.
Semantic PHY; local RL
schedulers.
BLER, latency,
energy, edge
TSR.
(P1) near-RT
RIC (xApp)
10 ms–1 s control over E2
interface; closed-loop xApps.
E2 telemetry →xApp
actions.
Learning-based xApps
for RA/slicing [28].
Slice utility,
QoE/TSR,
stability.
(P2) non-RT
RIC
(rApp/SMO)
>1 s to minutes; A1/O1;
training/orchestration/policy.
Data lake/DT/KG →
policies/models.
Long-timescale
orchestration; DT-RAN;
FL.
Global TSR,
energy,
generalization.
(P3)
Cross-layer /
E2E
Joint intelligence across P0–P2
with multi-timescale
coordination.
Multi-timescale context →
hierarchical control.
Semantic–agentic
co-design frameworks.
Pareto: TSR–
latency–energy.
(2) Agentic Intelligence by Autonomy and Co-
ordination Granularity: On the intelligence side,
reinforcement learning and deep learning have been
widely applied to PHY/MAC and RAN functions such
as spectrum allocation, power control, and user as-
sociation.
These solutions primarily reflect single-
agent or loosely coupled multi-agent autonomy, where
agents optimize local KPIs with limited reasoning
about global task intent. To improve scalability, re-
cent works adopt multi-agent reinforcement learn-
ing (MARL) for coordinated scheduling, interfer-
ence management, and mobility, often using cen-
tralized training–decentralized execution or hierar-
chical MARL to mitigate non-stationarity and par-
tial observability.
Emerging directions incorporate
foundation-model-assisted agents (e.g., LLM-based
planners) and knowledge-graph-augmented reasoning
to provide agents with richer context, enabling intent-
aware policy selection and cross-layer decision mak-
ing. Existing MARL/controller studies are usually bit-
centric, task-siloed, and face stability/trust challenges
when scaled to large heterogeneous RANs.
(3) RAN Control Placement–from PHY/MAC
Intelligence to O-RAN RICs: The practical sub-
strate for AI-RAN has been significantly shaped by
O-RAN [29]. AI-driven O-RAN introduces standard-
ized near-real-time (near-RT) and non-real-time (non-
RT) RICs, open interfaces (E2/A1/O1), and deploy-
able xApps/rApps for closed-loop RAN optimization.
Current O-RAN-based works map learning to specific
control locations: (i) PHY/MAC-level intelligence for
fast adaptation, (ii) near-RT RIC agents for sub-second
control such as scheduling and interference mitigation,
and (iii) non-RT RIC orchestration for long-timescale
analytics, policy management, and federated training.
While O-RAN provides openness and a hierarchical
4
C. Feng, et al.
Table 2
Comparison of Traditional RAN, AI-driven O-RAN, and 6G Native-AI Networks.
Dimension
Traditional RAN
AI-driven O-RAN
6G Native-AI Networks
Network Architecture
Proprietary, vertically integrated
Disaggregated RAN open interfaces
AI-native stack native intelligence
AI integration
Heuristics/rules limited learningxApps/rApps in RICs AI-assisted control
AI at all layers agentic intelligence
Optimization target
Rate/coverage bit-level QoS
RRM, mobility, interference control
Task success semantic utility
Control paradigm
Centralized static config
Closed-loop RIC, near-RT control
Proactive autonomy multi-agent MARL
Communication abstraction Bits, Shannon symbol fidelity
Bits + early semantic trials
Semantics/knowledge meaning fidelity
Scalability & flexibility
Low, vendor lock-in
Moderate, orchestrated apps
High, distributed agents + FL
Trust & security
Conventional crypto, no AI trust
Basic privacy (FL), limited XAI
Built-in trust, auditable agents
Energy efficiency
Secondary objective
AI overhead, emerging EE focus
EE-aware AI, adaptive semantics
control plane, its dominant optimization targets re-
main throughput/QoS-centric, and it lacks native sup-
port for semantic KPIs and intent-level control.
(4) Cross-axis Enablers–Large Foundation Mod-
els and Knowledge Graphs: Cross-layer semantic–
agentic convergence relies on shared representations
and reasoning interfaces.
Large foundation mod-
els (e.g., LLM/MLLM-based wireless agents) pro-
vide generalizable semantic extraction across modal-
ities and tasks, offering a reusable backbone for se-
mantic abstraction beyond handcrafted features and
enabling high-level task planning in AI-native RANs
[34, 35]. Knowledge graphs (KGs) complement foun-
dation models by organizing network state, intent,
topology, and service knowledge into explicit rela-
tional structures that support explainable inference,
policy constraints, and long-horizon coordination [36,
37].
Recent studies indicate that KG-augmented agents
can infer latent dynamics and transfer policies across
scenarios, while exchanging compact semantic sym-
bols rather than raw observations [36].
(i) Infer-
ence latency: LLM-based agents typically incur sub-
stantially higher per-decision delay than lightweight
RL xApps, especially under multi-step reasoning or
tool-calling; hence they are usually placed in non-
RT or near-RT loops, while fast PHY/MAC ac-
tions remain delegated to smaller distilled policies
[34, 38, 30].
(ii) Model size and footprint: wire-
less foundation models often reach hundreds of mil-
lions to billions of parameters, exceeding the mem-
ory/compute budget of typical edge nodes; practical
prototypes therefore rely on parameter-efficient tun-
ing, pruning/distillation, or GPU-class edge/cloud ex-
ecution [35]. (iii) DT/offloading dependence: to re-
duce trial-and-error cost and ensure safe orchestra-
tion, foundation-model/KG agents are frequently cou-
pled with digital twins for what-if evaluation and with
edge offloading for heavy inference, introducing addi-
tional DT synchronization overhead and offloading la-
tency [39, 38, 40, 32]. Overall, foundation-model/KG
agents are best positioned as slow-timescale se-
mantic planners or coordinators complementary to
lightweight real-time controllers, rather than drop-in
replacements for near-RT xApps.
(5) Standard-Readiness: We emphasize that cur-
rent O-RAN specifications remain largely bit-centric
and do not yet define native semantic KPIs or seman-
tic information elements in O1/A1/E2 service mod-
els. Therefore, semantic-native AI-RAN should be in-
terpreted as a forward-looking extension: (i) seman-
tic embeddings can be carried as payloads over exist-
ing E2 service models or via vendor-specific E2SM
extensions; (ii) task/semantic KPIs such as TSR can
be mapped to new KPM groups in O1 and gradually
standardized. Throughout this survey, we distinguish
standard-ready components (e.g., RL xApps/rApps,
CTDE/MARL control placement) from vision-only
components (e.g., semantic KPIs, semantic routing
primitives), so as to avoid over-claiming standard ma-
turity.
In summary, existing research has made strong
progress along individual axes—semantic abstraction
for task-oriented communication, distributed learning
for autonomous RAN control, and O-RAN for de-
ployable AI controllers—but lacks an integrated view
that jointly considers what semantics are exchanged,
how autonomous agents collaborate, and where intel-
ligence is placed in the RAN hierarchy. This motivates
the taxonomy and survey scope of this paper, which
systematically maps existing contributions onto these
three axes and identifies the remaining gaps toward
operational 6G semantic-agentic AI-RAN.
3. 6G Semantic-Agentic AI-RAN Framework
A growing body of literature indicates that 6G ra-
dio access networks (RANs) will evolve from AI-
assisted optimization toward intelligence-native oper-
ation, where semantic-level information exchange and
autonomous decision-making become first-class de-
sign objectives. In this context, recent works on Sem-
Com and on distributed/agentic network intelligence
are increasingly viewed as complementary rather than
independent.
In this work, we summarize a lay-
ered semantic–agentic AI-RAN stack that has emerged
across representative studies, clarify the role of each
functional layer, and discuss how semantic and agentic
components interact to enable task-oriented and scal-
able 6G services.
Towards 6G Native-AI Edge Networks: A Semantic-Aware and Agentic Intelligence Paradigm
5
3.1. System Architecture
Fig. 1. Illustration of a 6G Native-AI architecture.
Fig. 1 presents a consolidated view of the emerg-
ing 6G Native-AI architecture. Different from con-
ventional RANs where AI is appended as a standalone
optimizer, recent semantic- and agent-centric works
advocate embedding intelligence across the protocol
stack and treating the network as an adaptive ecosys-
tem that (i) communicates meaning through seman-
tic representations and (ii) reasons/acts autonomously
through distributed agents. Conceptually, the archi-
tecture can be organized as a multi-layer stack from
radio/physical functions up to application services,
with SemCom and agentic intelligence acting as cross-
cutting enablers.
(1) Radio Access and Physical Foundation:
At the foundation of the 6G Native-AI architec-
ture, multiple studies have shifted from block-wise
PHY/MAC designs toward end-to-end or partially
end-to-end learned transceivers. Typical examples in-
clude deep joint source–channel coding (JSCC) and
neural transceiver pipelines that jointly optimize mod-
ulation, coding, beamforming, and scheduling under
task-oriented objectives.
In these designs, the per-
formance target moves beyond pure bit reconstruc-
tion (e.g., BER/BLER) toward task success and se-
mantic fidelity, especially for perception- and intent-
driven services.
Complementary research exploits
reinforcement learning (RL) or self-learning mecha-
nisms for beamforming, link adaptation, and dynamic
spectrum access, enabling proactive reactions to traffic
heterogeneity [30]. Since 6G edge devices remain re-
source constrained, model pruning, quantization, and
adaptive-complexity inference are commonly adopted
to keep real-time feasibility and energy cost under
control [41].
(2) AI-native Orchestration Layer: Above the
radio foundation, the AI-native network layer mech-
anisms the control and learning fabric that sus-
tains long-term evolution.
Recent studies empha-
size continual/self-supervised learning to cope with
non-stationary environments, and distributed learn-
ing paradigms such as federated learning (FL) and
split learning to avoid centralizing sensitive data
while maintaining scalability. Model compression and
knowledge distillation further allow lightweight de-
ployment of inference modules on edge nodes. In par-
allel, network slicing is increasingly revisited through
a semantic-aware perspective: rather than allocating
resources solely to meet throughput or latency con-
straints, slices are shaped to maximize task-level util-
ity (e.g., maintaining XR scene coherence or V2X in-
tent reliability). This layer also hosts non-real-time
optimization, digital-twin-assisted planning, and pol-
icy governance are typically placed in O-RAN-aligned
systems.
(3) Agentic Intelligence Layer: A key trend in
the AI-RAN literature is to conceptualize network
elements as autonomous agents that perceive local
state, take actions, and learn reward-driven policies.
Such agents may reside at base stations, edge servers,
or terminals, and are often coordinated using multi-
agent reinforcement learning (MARL) variants such as
centralized-training-decentralized-execution (CTDE)
or hierarchical MARL to stabilize learning under par-
tial observability. Importantly, an increasing subset of
works further argues that agent coordination should be
mediated by task-relevant semantic messages rather
than raw telemetry, thereby reducing signaling over-
head while enhancing cooperative efficiency. Knowl-
edge graphs (KGs) and multi-modal foundation mod-
els are often introduced as contextual reasoning sub-
strates: KGs encode structured relationships among
network state, service intent, and environment seman-
tics, while foundation models provide generalizable
semantic extraction and planning priors. Trust and ro-
bustness are also recurrent themes; representative ap-
proaches include secure aggregation in FL, policy au-
diting, and ledger-style mechanisms for model prove-
nance.
Overall, the agentic layer provides scalable
autonomy, especially when intelligence must be dis-
tributed across dense and heterogeneous 6G deploy-
ments.
(4) Semantic Layer: Complementary to agentic
control, SemCom redefines what is exchanged over
the air. Instead of transmitting raw symbols, seman-
tic encoders and decoders extract task-relevant embed-
dings (features, intents, or knowledge) and reconstruct
outcomes with acceptable meaning distortion. Conse-
quently, task success rate (TSR) and semantic fidelity
become natural KPIs, often instantiated via similar-
ity measures in embedding space (e.g., cosine or dis-
tributional distances). This layer is not a monolithic
module in practice; several proposed systems place se-
mantic encoding either close to perception/application
endpoints (for task-level semantics) or within cross-
layer PHY stacks (for feature-level semantics), de-
pending on latency and standardization constraints.
(5) Semantic–Agentic Coupling: Among the ex-
6
C. Feng, et al.
isting work, the semantic and agentic layers are in-
trinsically intertwined.
Semantics extracted at one
node serve as compact, meaning-rich inputs for agent
collaboration and policy selection, while agent deci-
sions adapt which semantic units need transmission
and when they should be prioritized to meet system-
wide objectives.
This closed-loop coupling is cen-
tral to the vision of semantic–agentic AI-RAN: com-
munication efficiency is aligned with task relevance,
and autonomy is grounded in shared semantic context.
Compared with AI-driven O-RAN that often confines
AI to modular controllers, the semantic–agentic archi-
tecture positions intelligence as a native network at-
tribute spanning fast local loops and slow orchestrated
evolution.
(6)
Cost
Dimensions
of
Large-Foundation-
Model/Knowledge-Graph
(LFM/KG)
Agents:
While LFMs and KG reasoning offer strong gener-
alization and planning capabilities for 6G AI-native
RANs, existing studies consistently reveal non-trivial
cost dimensions that must be addressed for practical
deployment. (i) Inference latency: LLM-based agents
typically introduce 10–100× higher per-decision
latency than lightweight RL/xApp policies, especially
when multi-step reasoning or tool-calling is required.
As a result, most works place LLM agents in non-RT
or near-RT control loops and keep fast PHY/MAC
decisions to smaller models or distilled policies. Rep-
resentative 6G agentic studies explicitly adopt such
slow/fast separation through split execution or hierar-
chical orchestration [34, 35, 38]. (ii) Model size and
memory footprint: Wireless foundation models and
LLM agents often span hundreds of millions to bil-
lions of parameters, exceeding the memory/compute
budget of typical RAN edge devices. Recent research
and prototypes therefore employ parameter-efficient
finetuning, pruning/distillation, and model caching to
reduce edge footprint, or offload heavy reasoning to
GPU-class edge/cloud servers [34]. (iii) Dependence
on DT / edge offloading: To reduce trial-and-error cost
and improve safety, LLM/KG agents are frequently
coupled with digital twins (DTs) for what-if analysis
and policy validation, and/or with edge offloading for
large-model inference. DT-copilot or LLM-DT hierar-
chical control frameworks are now a prevalent pattern
for complex RAN orchestration [39, 38, 40].
This
also implies extra system complexity (DT fidelity,
synchronization overhead, and offloading latency) that
does not exist in purely lightweight MARL designs.
Overall, foundation-model/KG agents are best viewed
as high-level semantic planners or coordinators (slow
timescale), complementary to small RT controllers. A
balanced AI-RAN design therefore requires explicit
latency/footprint/offloading
budgeting
instead
of
treating LLM/KG agents as drop-in replacements for
near-RT xApps.
The interconnection of these layers forms a closed-
loop system. Semantic information guides agent in-
teractions, agents generate adaptive policies that feed
into the native-AI orchestration, and the orchestration
mechanisms provide updated models that refine both
semantic encoders and agent policies.
This cyclic
interaction yields a network that is not only self-
optimizing but also self-evolving, continuously adapt-
ing to dynamic environments and emerging applica-
tions. In contrast to AI-driven O-RAN where intelli-
gence is largely confined to modular controllers, the
proposed architecture embodies intelligence as a na-
tive property of the communication system, enabling a
transition from bit pipes to knowledge-driven ecosys-
tems.
3.2. Problem Formulation
To connect heterogeneous studies under a common
analytical umbrella, a large fraction of recent works
adopt a joint optimization view where semantic-aware
transmission and agentic decisions are co-designed.
While individual formulations vary across tasks and
control locations, they can be interpreted through a
representative abstraction that couples semantic fi-
delity with multi-agent utility [42, 18, 23, 24].
Consider a set of network entities N = {1, 2, . . . , N},
where each entity may be modeled as an autonomous
agent. Agent i observes a local state si (e.g., chan-
nel indicators, queue states, service context), selects
an action ai (e.g., spectrum/power/scheduling deci-
sions), and updates a policy πi(ai|si) to maximize a
task-oriented reward Ri [22, 23].
On the SemCom
side, an encoder fθ(·) maps raw data x into an embed-
ding z = fθ(x), and a decoder gϕ(·) reconstructs a task-
relevant outcome ˆx = gϕ(z) [14, 16, 17]. Semantic dis-
tortion is typically measured via an embedding-space
fidelity metric
Dsem(x, ˆx) = 1 −Sim E(x), E(ˆx),
(1)
where E(·) denotes a task-appropriate embedding op-
erator (often a transformer/foundation model), and
Sim(·) is instantiated as cosine similarity or distribu-
tional distances depending on the modality [18, 16].
With these ingredients, many semantic–agentic AI-
RAN systems can be interpreted as optimizing a cou-
pled objective that balances task-level utility and se-
mantic fidelity under practical constraints:
max
{πi},θ,ϕ
X
i∈N

α E[Ri(si, ai)] −β E[Dsem(x, ˆx)]

,
(2)
subject to bandwidth, energy, and latency budgets
X
i∈N
bi ≤B,
X
i∈N
ei ≤E,
ℓ(x, ˆx) ≤L,
(3)
where α and β trade off task-level benefits (through
agent rewards) against semantic distortion, reflect-
ing the inherently multi-objective nature of semantic–
agentic RAN design [42, 18].
Towards 6G Native-AI Edge Networks: A Semantic-Aware and Agentic Intelligence Paradigm
7
Table 3
Cost dimensions of Large-Foundation-Model/Knowledge-Graph (LFM/KG) agents in AI-RAN.
Cost
Existing Pattern in literature
Implication to AI-RAN placement
Inference
la-
tency
Multi-step reasoning/tool-calling yields high per-decision de-
lay; often mitigated by split or hierarchical execution [34, 35].
Prefer Non-RT/Near-RT loops; keep PHY/MAC actions to
small distilled models.
Model size
0.1-10B+ parameters; edge memory limits require PEFT,
pruning, caching, or distillation [34].
Large models reside on GPU edge/cloud; edge devices run
lightweight surrogates.
DT/offloading
dependence
LLM/KG agents frequently rely on DT for safe planning and
on edge offloading for heavy inference [39, 38, 40].
Adds DT fidelity/sync overhead; offloading latency must be
budgeted in control loop.
Fig. 2. Illustration of the proposed 6G native-AI edge networks from a semantic-aware and agentic intelligence perspective.
Rather than a single prescriptive algorithm, the pro-
posed framework follow a few recurring patterns: (i)
semantic models are trained (often self-supervised) to
minimize Dsem under resource constraints [14, 17];
(ii) agent policies are learned via RL/MARL using re-
wards that incorporate task utility and semantic penal-
ties [22, 23]; and (iii) an AI-native orchestration layer
governs slow-timescale model evolution through FL
rounds, periodic retraining, or digital-twin-assisted re-
finement [24, 28].
A widely adopted engineering intuition is to
separate timescales:
fast-timescale agentic control
(e.g., near-RT RIC / edge agents) adapts rapidly to
channel and traffic dynamics, while semantic en-
coders/decoders evolve more slowly (e.g., non-RT
controllers or background edge jobs) due to higher
training cost and stability considerations [23, 24].
Overall, this unified view highlights the core de-
sign principle shared across semantic–agentic AI-
RAN studies: communication resources and control
actions are no longer optimized for bit accuracy alone,
but for maximizing end-to-end task success in a dis-
tributed and resource-limited 6G environment.
3.3. Two-timescale Optimization Algorithm
A recurrent design choice in the semantic–agentic
AI-RAN literature is to update agentic control policies
on a fast timescale (to track short-term radio dynam-
ics), while adapting semantic encoder/decoder models
on a slow timescale (due to heavier training cost and
to avoid destabilizing multi-agent learning). Similar
two-timescale separations are widely used in hierar-
chical MARL and cross-layer learning systems, and
provide a useful conceptual template for practical de-
ployments.
A typical semantic–agentic formulation
8
C. Feng, et al.
couples multi-agent utility with semantic distortion:
J(θ, ϕ, {πi}) =
X
i∈N
(α E[Ri(si, ai)] −β E[Dsem(x, ˆx)]) ,
(4)
where {πi} denote agent policies, (θ, ϕ) denote se-
mantic encoder/decoder parameters, and Dsem is an
embedding-space semantic distortion metric.
To analyze the algorithm convergence performance,
we adopt the following assumptions:
Assumption 1 (Objective smoothness and gradi-
ent noise). For every agent i, the reward functional
Ri is bounded and LR-Lipschitz with respect to the
joint policy parameters through the induced state–
action distribution. The semantic distortion is defined
by Dsem(x, ˆx) = 1 −Sim(E(x), E(ˆx)), where the en-
coder E(·) and similarity map Sim(·, ·) are LE- and LS -
Lipschitz, respectively. Stochastic gradients of J with
respect to θ, ϕ, and {πi} are unbiased, and their second
moments are uniformly bounded.
Assumption 2 (Policy parametrization and ergodic-
ity). Each policy is parametrized by ψi (e.g., an actor
network) taking values in a compact feasible set. For
any fixed (θ, ϕ, {ψi}), the resulting Markov chain is er-
godic and admits a unique stationary distribution.
Assumption 3 (Learning rates and scale separation).
Let ηt denote the policy learning rate and γt the seman-
tic learning rate. They satisfy Robbins–Monro condi-
tions P
t ηt = ∞, P
t η2
t < ∞, P
t γt = ∞, P
t γ2
t < ∞,
and enforce a strict timescale separation γt/ηt →0 as
t →∞.
Assumption 4 (Critic reliability). The critic is con-
sistent in the sense that its Bellman error converges to
zero in expectation (e.g., via tabular estimation with
sufficient visitation, or function approximation with
vanishing residual). The associated estimation noise
forms a martingale difference sequence with bounded
variance.
Proposition
1.
(Two–Timescale
Convergence
of
the
Semantic–Agentic
Learning):
Con-
sider
the
joint
objective
J(θ, ϕ, {πi}i∈N)
=
P
i∈N(α E[Ri(si, ai)] −β E[Dsem(x, ˆx)]), optimized by
stochastic gradient updates on the fast timescale for
the multi-agent policies {πi} and on the slow timescale
for the semantic encoder–decoder (θ, ϕ). Then, almost
surely, the coupled iterates  θt, ϕt, {ψi,t} generated by
policy-gradient (or actor–critic) updates on the fast
timescale and semantic SGD on the slow timescale
converge to the internally chain transitive set of the
limiting ODE system: ˙ψi ∈ΠXi
h
∇ψi J(θ, ϕ, {ψ j})
i
, ˙θ =
∇θ J(θ, ϕ, {ψ⋆
j (θ, ϕ)}), ˙ϕ = ∇ϕ J(θ, ϕ, {ψ⋆
j (θ, ϕ)}), where
ΠXi[·] denotes projection onto the feasible policy set
and {ψ⋆
j (θ, ϕ)} is the (set-valued) stationary solution
of the fast dynamics for fixed (θ, ϕ).
In particular,
every limit point is a stationary point of J under the
two–timescale decomposition; if the fast subsystem
admits a unique Nash equilibrium and J is locally
smooth around that equilibrium manifold, the joint
process converges almost surely to a locally stationary
solution of the full problem.
Proof. The
argument
follows
the
classical
two–timescale
stochastic
approximation
method-
ology. For fixed (θ, ϕ), the policy updates evolve on
the fast timescale according to a noisy discretiza-
tion of the ODE ˙ψi = ΠXi[∇ψiJ(θ, ϕ, {ψ j})]. Under
Assumptions 1 & 2 and standard policy-gradient regu-
larity, Bena¨ım–Hofbauer–Sorensen and Kushner–Yin
theory imply that the fast iterates track the internally
chain transitive set of the fast ODE; when the induced
general-sum game admits a unique stationary Nash,
the attractor is a singleton {ψ⋆(θ, ϕ)}.
Because γt/ηt
→0, the slow variables (θ, ϕ)
are quasi-static to the fast loop.
Replacing {ψi}
with {ψ⋆
i (θ, ϕ)} yields the averaged slow ODE ˙θ =
∇θJ(θ, ϕ, {ψ⋆}), ˙ϕ = ∇ϕJ(θ, ϕ, {ψ⋆}). By Assumptions
1 and bounded second moments, the semantic SGD
is an asymptotic pseudo-trajectory of the slow ODE.
The Robbins–Monro step-size conditions ensure that
the martingale noise vanishes in aggregate; thus, the
coupled process converges almost surely to the chain-
recurrent set of the product ODE. Smoothness then
gives stationarity of all limit points. If, in addition,
the fast equilibrium is unique and the Jacobian of the
slow vector field is Hurwitz in a neighborhood, stan-
dard Lyapunov arguments establish local asymptotic
stability of the joint fixed point.
Corollary 1. (Non-asymptotic Tracking/Finite-time
tracking bound): If gradients are L-Lipschitz and
mini-batches of size m are used in both loops, then
after T fast-timescale iterations the expected squared
gradient norm of the joint objective along the slow
manifold satisfies mint≤T
E∥∇J(θt, ϕt, {ψt})∥2
=
O

1
√
T +
1
√m

+ O(δT), where δT is the manifold track-
ing error induced by the finite separation of timescales
and vanishes as γt/ηt →0. This provides a practical
guideline for selecting batch sizes and learning-rate
schedules to meet wall-clock convergence targets.
Remark 1: The proposition justifies the algorithmic
template used in your architecture: keep policy learn-
ing fast (near-real-time RIC or edge agents) while
updating semantic encoders/decoders slowly (non-RT
controller or background edge jobs).
The assump-
tions map cleanly to engineering knobs: bounded re-
wards arise from reward clipping and QoS caps; Lip-
schitz conditions are encouraged by spectral normal-
ization of actors/encoders; ergodicity is promoted via
ε-greedy or entropy regularization; and the step-size
separation is realized by setting γt = c ηt with c ≪1
(e.g., c = 0.1). In federated deployments, the same
proof path applies by treating each global aggrega-
tion round as one slow step; consensus or blockchain-
backed model registries preserve the martingale prop-
erty of update noise under honest-majority assump-
tions. Finally, the non-asymptotic bound clarifies the
Towards 6G Native-AI Edge Networks: A Semantic-Aware and Agentic Intelligence Paradigm
9
accuracy–overhead trade-off: increasing batch sizes
or communication periods reduces gradient noise,
while stronger separation (smaller c) tightens δT at
the expense of slower semantic adaptation—exactly
the knob you will sweep in experiments.
3.4. Proposed Workflow for Semantic–Agentic Loops
To bridge vision-only semantic primitives with
standard-ready O-RAN control, we proposed a de-
ployable workflow:
Step 1-Semantic encoder placement: Lightweight
L1/L2 semantic encoders run at UE/edge (or DU)
to extract task-relevant tokens, while large founda-
tion/KG reasoning models remain at edge cloud or
non-RT domains due to latency/compute costs.
Step 2-Near-RT semantic telemetry via E2: The
gNB/DU packages semantic telemetry as candidate
E2SM vendor extensions, e.g., task-id, semantic-
token-size, semantic-confidence, TSR-proxy, and re-
ports them over the E2 interface to the near-RT RIC.
Near-RT xApps jointly consume semantic teleme-
try and classical KPMs (SINR/BLER/PRB/queue)
to perform fast control: semantic-aware scheduling,
MCS/HARQ adaptation, or redundancy suppression
across UEs/cells.
Step 3-Slow-timescale model/policy update via
A1/O1: The near-RT RIC periodically uploads traces
(semantic KPIs,radio KPIs,context) to the non-RT
RIC/SMO. Non-RT rApps retrain/distill semantic en-
coders or refine MARL reward/policies using FL/DT
tools, then push updated model versions and policy in-
tents back through A1 policies, while O1 handles life-
cycle management and rollback.
Step 4-Semantic message-based negotiation among
agents: Multi-agent coordination can leverage a low-
rate semantic side-channel (e.g., exchanging L2 in-
tents or L3 KG deltas rather than raw states), reduc-
ing signaling overhead and stabilizing CTDE/MARL
negotiation.
To make the proposed semantic–agentic AI-RAN
actionable in practice, we first present an O-RAN–
oriented deployment workflow.
Algorithm 1 sum-
marizes how the fast policy-control loop and the
slow semantic-learning loop are instantiated across
PHY/MAC, near-RT RIC (xApps), and non-RT RIC
(rApps), together with the required E2/A1/O1 inter-
actions. For clarity, Algorithm 1 focuses on where
each function runs and how information flows across
O-RAN components, while deferring the detailed two-
timescale learning updates to Algorithm 2.
3.5. Engineering Criteria for Time-scale Separation
Proposition 1 assumes semantic models evolve suf-
ficiently slowly compared to fast-loop control.
In
practice, this can be verified using measurable online
proxies: (i) Representation drift rate. Let zt denote
semantic embeddings. Over a sliding window ∆, de-
fine Drift = E[(1 −cos)(zt, zt−∆)]. If Drift stays below
Algorithm 1 Deployment Workflow for Semantic–
Agentic Two-Timescale AI-RAN Closed Loops.
1: Input: Task ID set T ; semantic encoder family {Eϕ}; founda-
tion/KG models {Fψ};near-RT xApps X; non-RT rApps R;radio
KPMs kradio (e.g., SINR/BLER/PRB/queue); semantic KPM
candidates ksem (e.g., TSR/intent-acc/latent-fidelity).
2: Output: Fast-loop semantic-aware control actions at (schedul-
ing/MCS/HARQ/beam/slicing); slow-loop semantic encoder
and MARL policy updates (ϕ, θ) with versioning.
3: (Step-1: Semantic encoder placement)
4: for all UEs or edge nodes u do
5:
Deploy lightweight E(u)
ϕ for L1/L2 token extraction;
6:
Keep heavy Fψ in edge cloud / non-RT domain for slow rea-
soning/planning;
7: end for
8: (Step-2: Near-RT semantic telemetry over E2)
9: for all gNB/DU cells c do
10:
Extract semantic tokens zt = Eϕ(xt) for task t∈T ;
11:
Pack candidate semantic IEs as E2SM vendor extensions:
{task-id, |zt|, conf(zt), d
TSRt};
12:
Report (kradio
t
, ksem
t
) to near-RT RIC via E2;
13: end for
14: (Step-3: Fast-loop control in near-RT RIC)
15: for all xApp x ∈X per control period do
16:
Consume (kradio
t
, ksem
t
);
17:
Compute semantic-aware actions at (e.g., semantic-aware
scheduling/MCS/HARQ/PRB/beam);
18:
Push actions to E2 nodes and execute in ms-level loop;
19: end for
20: (Step-4: Slow-loop update in non-RT RIC/SMO)
21: Near-RT RIC uploads traces D = {(kradio
t
, ksem
t
, contextt)} to
non-RT;
22: for all rApp r ∈R per slow period do
23:
Retrain / distill semantic encoders Eϕ using D (optionally
FL/DT-assisted);
24:
Re-optimize MARL reward/policies πθ with global objec-
tives;
25:
Version models (ϕ, θ) and validate against semantic SLAs;
26:
Deliver updates to near-RT via A1 policies; manage lifecy-
cle/rollback via O1;
27: end for
28: (Step-5: Semantic message-based multi-agent negotiation)
29: Agents exchange low-rate L2/L3 messages (intents or KG
deltas) as a semantic side-channel;
30: Update cooperative MARL policies under CTDE/hierarchical
roles.
a tunable threshold ϵ1 within each fast-loop policy up-
date horizon, embeddings are quasi-static and the two-
timescale assumption holds. Otherwise, slow seman-
tic updates should be throttled or paused. (ii) Reward
non-stationarity proxy: Track distribution shift of per-
agent rewards, e.g., NS = DKL (p(r|t)∥p(r|t −∆)).
When NS exceeds ϵ2, the critic/environment is ef-
fectively drifting, signaling that semantic updates (or
context changes) are too rapid for stable MARL. (iii)
Policy oscillation metric: Monitor consecutive pol-
icy parameter changes Osc =
∥θt−θt−∆∥
∥θt−∆∥, or behavioral
TV distance. Persistent Osc ≥ϵ3 indicates time-scale
coupling or credit-assignment instability; mitigations
include increasing separation (smaller c = γt/ηt) or
rolling back semantic versions via O1. These crite-
ria translate the mathematical separation intuition into
operational knobs: measure Drift/NS/Osc online, and
adapt semantic update periodicity K or step-ratio c to
maintain stable fast-loop learning.
10
C. Feng, et al.
Algorithm 2 Generic Template of Two-timescale
Semantic-Agentic Learning
1: Initialization: Initialize semantic encoder–decoder parameters
(θ0, ϕ0), multi-agent policies {πi,0} for i ∈N, and step sizes ηt
(fast) and γt (slow), with γt/ηt →0.
2: for each time slot t do
3:
Fast loop (agentic policy update):
4:
for each agent i do
5:
Observe local state st
i.
6:
Select action at
i ∼πi,t(st
i).
7:
Receive reward Rt
i reflecting both task utility and seman-
tic penalty.
8:
Update policy πi,t using policy-gradient or actor–critic
update with step ηt.
9:
end for
10:
if t mod K = 0 then
11:
Slow loop (semantic model update):
12:
Collect minibatch of transmitted–reconstructed pairs
(x, ˆx).
13:
Compute semantic loss Dsem(x, ˆx).
14:
Update encoder–decoder (θ, ϕ) using SGD with step γt.
15:
end if
16: end for
17: Stopping criterion: Terminate when average task success rate
(TSR) saturates and gradient norms ∥∇J∥fall below threshold.
Fig. 3. Illustration of experiment testbed.
Practical caveats: In large-scale deep MARL with
semantic coupling, Assumptions 2-4 may only hold
approximately.
The fast subsystem can admit mul-
tiple equilibria, and semantic representation updates
may induce reward/observation drift that violates strict
quasi-static assumptions. Hence, most existing works
validate two-timescale designs primarily via digital-
twin or hardware-in-the-loop evidence, rather than re-
lying on global convergence guarantees.
4. Case Study
In this work, we conduct a two-timescale semantic–
agentic case study by reproducing representative Sem-
Com and AI-RAN baselines from prior work under a
unified AI-RAN setting. Fig. 3 presents our experi-
mental testbed.
4.1. Experiment Setup
(1) Datasets: Following common practice in se-
mantic communication studies, we reproduce two task
families that are widely used to quantify semantic fi-
delity and task-level success. Specifically, we adopt (i)
MS-COCO Captions for image-to-text semantic deliv-
ery and (ii) LibriSpeech ASR for speech-to-text se-
mantic delivery. Both datasets provide aligned raw
inputs, ground-truth semantic outcomes, and standard
task metrics, enabling faithful reproduction of prior
evaluation protocols. In addition, to emulate vehicu-
lar V2X semantics, we reproduce an intent/trajectory
exchange pipeline using CARLA: each vehicle agent
transmits compact embeddings of planned maneuvers,
object states, or driving intent. This setting is consis-
tent with L2/L3 semantic levels in Table 1 and matches
the simulator-based semantics adopted in recent stud-
ies.
(2) Testbed topology: Our reproduced RAN topol-
ogy follows a 3GPP-inspired heterogeneous layout
commonly used in the referenced baselines. We con-
sider 5–10 base stations, multiple edge servers, and on
the order of 102 mobile devices with clustered mobil-
ity. Cells are deployed on a hexagonal grid with wrap-
around boundaries, and channels follow TR 38.901
pedestrian/vehicular profiles. For multi-agent control
baselines, devices are partitioned into local groups
(typically 10–20 agents per cluster) to reproduce co-
ordination and non-stationarity conditions reported in
prior MARL-RAN evaluations.
(3) Prototype hardware patterns: To remain con-
sistent with the prototype patterns in the reproduced
references, our Hardware-in-the-Loop (HIL) configu-
ration couples GPU servers for semantic model train-
ing with edge accelerators for near-RT agentic control.
Concretely, we use (i) A100-class GPUs for training
transformer-based semantic encoders/decoders, (ii)
Jetson/Xavier-class edge nodes for semantic inference
and on-device MARL policies, and (iii) SDR plat-
forms (e.g., USRP B210/X310) for PHY-layer emula-
tion. This division mirrors the control-placement axis
(Axis-3): semantic adaptation and global orchestra-
tion are mapped to non-RT resources, while fast policy
execution resides at the edge or near-RT control plane.
(4) System Parameters and Hyper-parameters:
We reproduce the main physical-layer and learning
settings from the corresponding baselines as closely as
possible. Bandwidths set to 10–20 MHz in sub-6 GHz
bands (e.g., 3.5 GHz) with UE power caps around
23 dBm. Delay budgets are set to ∼1 ms for real-
time services and 5–10 ms for best-effort services. On
the agentic side, we reproduce MAPPO/CTDE-style
MARL baselines with discount factor γ ≈0.99, PPO
clipping ≈0.2, and entropy regularization ≈10−2. Se-
mantic encoders/decoders are transformer-based with
embedding dimension 256–512, trained using Adam
with learning rate around 10−4.
For two-timescale
variants, we follow the stability-driven schedule used
in prior two-timescale MARL studies and set the fast-
loop step size roughly one order larger than the slow
semantic-update step size, consistent with Section 3.3.
Towards 6G Native-AI Edge Networks: A Semantic-Aware and Agentic Intelligence Paradigm
11
(5) Baselines and metrics:
We reproduce and
compare three baseline families that represent domi-
nant paradigms in the literature: (i) Bit-centric RAN
(TR-RAN): symbol-level transmission optimized for
throughput/BER with heuristic or centralized schedul-
ing; (ii) AI-driven O-RAN (AI-O-RAN): near-RT RIC
hosting RL-based xApps for scheduling/power control
without explicit semantic abstraction; (iii) Semantic-
only communication (SemCom-only): end-to-end se-
mantic encoder–decoder minimizing semantic distor-
tion without distributed agentic coordination.
Metrics follow the reproduced protocols and extend
beyond BER to task and system KPIs: (i) Task Success
Rate (TSR): probability of correct task-level recon-
struction (e.g., intent accuracy, caption correctness)
[43, 44]; (ii) Semantic Bandwidth Efficiency (TSR/Hz):
TSR per unit bandwidth [43, 45]; (iii) End-to-end la-
tency: time from semantic generation to task com-
pletion; (iv) Learning stability/convergence: iterations
(or wall-clock time) until MARL policies stabilize,
tracked via reward variance or regret.
4.2. Representative Results & Cross-Study Trends
Unless otherwise stated, the following figures report
results from our reproduced implementations under
the unified setup above. While absolute values may
vary with task specifics, the reproduced experiments
consistently reflect the qualitative trends summarized
next.
Fig. 4. Task success rate (TSR) versus SNR under channel variation
for representative reproduced paradigms.
4.2.1. TSR under Channel Variation
As shown in Fig. 4, all schemes exhibit a monotone
TSR improvement with increasing SNR, consistent
with enhanced link reliability. Bit-centric baselines
(TR-RAN and AI-O-RAN) show the lowest TSR,
while semantic-native approaches deliver clear gains
in the low-to-mid SNR range (approximately 0–15
dB). In particular, the two-timescale semantic–agentic
design achieves the highest TSR across this regime,
whereas at high SNR (≥20 dB) the curves gradually
converge toward a common saturation level.
The performance ordering is primarily driven by
the communication abstraction and control coupling.
Semantic-native transmission improves TSR at mod-
erate SNR by conveying task-relevant embeddings
rather than raw symbols, thereby reducing redundancy
and focusing channel uses on information that directly
impacts task outcomes. This yields higher task-level
robustness under noise compared with bit-level deliv-
ery, even when the latter is optimized for throughput
or BER. The additional margin of the two-timescale
semantic–agentic approach over SemCom-only arises
from agentic coordination and timescale separation.
Fast-loop agents incorporate semantic distortion and
task utility into their scheduling and power deci-
sions, prioritizing critical semantic packets and mit-
igating collisions or congestion through cooperative
policies. Meanwhile, slow-loop semantic model adap-
tation evolves on a coarser timescale, keeping repre-
sentations quasi-stationary during fast policy learning.
This reduces training non-stationarity and supports
more stable near-real-time control, which translates
into higher TSR under fluctuating channels. As SNR
becomes large, channel-induced errors are no longer
the bottleneck; consequently, the achievable TSR is
dominated by the intrinsic accuracy ceiling of the se-
mantic encoder–decoder and task models, leading to
the observed saturation and diminishing inter-scheme
gaps.
Fig. 5. Semantic bandwidth efficiency versus allocated bandwidth
for four representative paradigms.
4.2.2. Semantic Bandwidth Efficiency
Fig.
5 compares semantic bandwidth efficiency,
defined as TSR achieved per unit bandwidth, under
progressively larger spectrum budgets. Two consis-
tent trends are observed. First, all schemes exhibit a
mild efficiency increase as bandwidth grows, reflect-
ing reduced congestion and fewer resource-contention
losses.
Second, semantic-native approaches sub-
stantially outperform bit-centric baselines across the
entire bandwidth range.
The two-timescale se-
mantic–agentic design remains the most bandwidth-
efficient, followed by SemCom-only, while AI-O-
RAN and TR-RAN form the lower-efficiency group.
Notably,
the efficiency gap is most pronounced
in tight-bandwidth regimes, where semantic–agentic
control sustains high TSR despite limited spectrum.
These trends can be explained by how each
paradigm uses spectrum relative to task relevance.
In TR-RAN and AI-O-RAN, transmissions remain
12
C. Feng, et al.
bit-level, so a sizable fraction of bandwidth is con-
sumed by payload redundancy, protocol overhead,
and retransmissions that do not directly contribute to
task success; consequently, TSR-per-Hz remains low,
especially under constrained budgets.
In contrast,
SemCom-only compresses raw data into task-oriented
semantic embeddings, removing non-essential bits
and improving the useful information density per
channel use. This directly elevates TSR-per-Hz, par-
ticularly when bandwidth is scarce. The further ad-
vantage of the two-timescale semantic–agentic ap-
proach stems from semantic-aware multi-agent co-
ordination layered on top of semantic compression.
Fast-loop agents prioritize high-utility semantic pack-
ets and suppress redundant semantic reports across
users/cells, while slow-loop slicing/budget updates
adapt resource shares to longer-term task demands.
This coordinated, timescale-separated control reduces
duplicate transmissions and prevents bandwidth waste
during traffic bursts, yielding consistently higher TSR-
per-Hz. As bandwidth becomes abundant, all methods
approach a flatter efficiency slope because task success
begins to saturate and additional spectrum offers di-
minishing returns; nevertheless, semantic–agentic de-
signs retain an efficiency lead due to their inherently
task-focused transmission and coordinated resource
usage.
Fig. 6. Learning stability and convergence of RAN control policies
for four representative paradigmss.
4.2.3. Learning Stability with Agentic Coordination
Fig. 6 depicts the policy learning dynamics mea-
sured by average return over training iterations. Three
salient behaviors emerge.
First, TR-RAN (heuris-
tic control) stays nearly flat, reflecting the absence
of learning.
Second, AI-O-RAN improves grad-
ually but converges to a lower steady return than
semantic-native schemes. Third, semantic-native ap-
proaches achieve higher asymptotic returns, with the
two-timescale semantic–agentic method converging
faster and exhibiting markedly reduced oscillations
compared with SemCom-only. In contrast, SemCom-
only shows persistent reward fluctuations during mid-
training, indicating unstable adaptation before set-
tling.
The stability differences are rooted in how rep-
resentation learning and control learning interact.
In SemCom-only, semantic encoders/decoders adapt
concurrently with per-slot control, but without ex-
plicit multi-agent coordination.
As semantic repre-
sentations drift, the effective environment observed
by each controller becomes non-stationary: the same
physical state may map to evolving semantic features,
and agents’ actions can conflict due to missing co-
ordination, leading to oscillatory rewards. The two-
timescale semantic–agentic design mitigates both ef-
fects. On the fast timescale, edge agents learn coop-
erative policies with rewards that explicitly penalize
semantic distortion and prioritize task utility, which
reduces conflicting actions and accelerates consen-
sus. On the slow timescale, semantic models update
less frequently, rendering the semantic feature space
quasi-static during fast-loop policy optimization. This
separation reduces non-stationarity in multi-agent re-
inforcement learning and allows policies to track a
slowly moving optimum, producing smoother conver-
gence and higher final return.
AI-O-RAN benefits
from learning-based control, but remaining bit-centric
means rewards are less aligned with task success and
semantic utility, limiting achievable return even after
convergence.
Fig. 7. Latency–energy trade-off (Pareto illustration) of four repre-
sentative paradigms; lower-left indicates better joint efficiency.
4.2.4. Latency and Energy Trade-offs
Fig. 7 plots the achievable latency–energy operat-
ing points for the four paradigms, where each series
represents a typical trade-off frontier under different
control/traffic settings.
All methods exhibit the ex-
pected tension between delay and energy: reducing la-
tency generally requires more aggressive resource us-
age, while energy saving tends to increase queueing or
retransmission delays. Among the compared designs,
the two-timescale semantic–agentic approach forms
the most favorable (lower-left) frontier, achieving both
lower end-to-end latency and lower energy per suc-
cessful task.
SemCom-only provides a visible im-
provement over bit-centric baselines but remains dom-
inated by the semantic–agentic frontier. AI-O-RAN
reduces latency relative to TR-RAN yet incurs higher
energy than semantic-native schemes, while TR-RAN
occupies the upper-right region, reflecting the least ef-
ficient joint performance.
Towards 6G Native-AI Edge Networks: A Semantic-Aware and Agentic Intelligence Paradigm
13
Table 4
Cross-study Trend and Representative Gains.
Ref.
Task/Scenario
Semantic
level
Channel / SNR / BW
Baseline
Metric & Gain (relative)
[43]
V2X intent exchange/ ma-
neuver negotiation
L2/L3
Urban fading; SNR −2–8
dB; 5–15 MHz
SemCom-only
Semantic Bandwidth Efficiency (TSR/Hz):
1.6–2.3× under BW≤12 MHz
[44]
V2X cooperative percep-
tion/collision avoidance
L2
Rayleigh; SNR 0–10 dB;
10 MHz
Bit-centric
V2X
+ heuristic RA
TSR: +18% @ 2 dB; +9% @ 5 dB
[45]
Edge perception (vision/
speech)
L1
AWGN; SNR −5–5 dB; 1–
4 MHz
JSCC
/
digital
comm.
Downstream acc.: +10–15% @ low SNR
[46]
Two-timescale
DT-
assisted slicing MARL
L1/L2
HetNet
load
traces
(system-level)
Single-timescale
MARL
Learning stability/regret:
Faster conver-
gence; reduced oscillation
[47]
O-RAN closed-loop RL
slicing prototype
L2
HIL; bursty traffic traces
AI-O-RAN
heuristic
Latency/energy trad-off:
Latency ↓25–
40%; energy per task ↓10–20%
These differences follow from how each paradigm
balances communication and computation for task de-
livery.
TR-RAN relies on bit-level reliability with
limited task awareness, leading to larger payloads
and more retransmissions, which jointly inflate de-
lay and energy. AI-O-RAN introduces learning-based
scheduling to mitigate congestion and improve la-
tency, but its bit-centric transmission still carries sub-
stantial redundancy; thus, energy per successful task
remains comparatively high, especially under bursty
loads.
SemCom-only reduces payload size through
task-oriented semantic embeddings, lowering airtime
and retransmission needs, which translates into tan-
gible latency and energy savings. However, without
agentic coordination, devices may still generate redun-
dant semantic updates or contend inefficiently for re-
sources, leaving part of the potential gain unrealized.
The two-timescale semantic–agentic design addresses
this gap by combining semantic compression with co-
operative multi-agent control: fast-loop agents pri-
oritize high-utility semantic packets and proactively
shape traffic to avoid bottlenecks, while slow-loop
semantic/cross-slice updates provide stable budgets
that prevent oscillatory overreaction. Consequently,
fewer transmissions are needed to reach a successful
task outcome, queueing delays are reduced, and com-
putational effort is amortized more effectively, yield-
ing the observed Pareto superiority. Overall, this re-
sults indicates that jointly optimizing meaning-level
communication and distributed agentic scheduling is
essential to achieve energy- and latency-efficient AI-
native RAN operation.
We summarize the reproduced cross-study trends in
Table 4. For each reproduced reference, we explicitly
list the task, channel/SNR/bandwidth regime, baseline
family, and task-aligned KPIs, and we report relative
gains as (Mprop −Mbase)/Mbase.
4.3. Discussion
Taken together, our reproduced experiments and
the surveyed results in the literature point to three
consistent, survey-level implications.
First, seman-
tic abstraction shifts RAN optimization from sym-
bol fidelity to task effectiveness: in our reproduced
settings, semantic-native designs improve TSR and
semantic bandwidth efficiency for perception- and
intent-driven services, especially under moderate SNR
or tight bandwidth. Second, agentic coordination is
required to scale semantic-aware control over dense
and heterogeneous deployments.
This is supported
by both reproduced MARL baselines and prior pro-
totypes, where distributed agents negotiating semantic
relevance and resource usage yield higher task perfor-
mance than non-coordinated semantic-only schemes.
Third, timescale separation emerges as a practical de-
sign motif: across reproduced two-timescale variants
and related prior studies, maintaining a fast policy
loop while updating semantic models on a slower loop
stabilizes learning and reconciles near-real-time con-
trol needs with slower semantic evolution.
At the same time, the reproduced evaluations and
surveyed prototypes also expose several limitations
that remain open.
(i) Transformer-scale seman-
tic encoders can impose non-trivial computational
overhead at the edge; lightweight foundation mod-
els and hardware-aware semantic coding remain ac-
tive research directions.
(ii) Trust/security mecha-
nisms (such as secure aggregation, provenance track-
ing, or ledger-backed coordination) are often vali-
dated only in simulation, and real-time integration
in O-RAN/HIL platforms is still nascent. (iii) Most
reported testbeds cover small- to medium-scale net-
works; scaling to thousands of agents will likely re-
quire hierarchical coordination and more standardized
semantic interfaces.
Finally, performance compar-
isons are sometimes affected by heterogeneity in tasks,
fidelity metrics, and control placements, reinforcing
the need for community benchmarks and standardized
semantic KPIs.
Overall, while the field is still emerging, both our
reproduced results and the broader literature consis-
tently suggest that the convergence of SemCom and
agentic intelligence is a promising pathway toward
14
C. Feng, et al.
task-effective, scalable, and energy-aware 6G Native-
AI RANs.
5. Application Scenarios
Our reproduced evidence, together with a growing
body of recent work, indicates that semantic–agentic
AI-RAN is most impactful in 6G services where task
outcome, intent exchange, and distributed autonomy
matter more than exact bit recovery. Recent surveys
and vision papers consistently identify vehicular au-
tonomy, immersive XR, industrial digital twins, and
edge intelligence as key first-wave beneficiaries, and
our reproduced case-study trends align with these pri-
orities [18, 44].
Autonomous vehicular networks (V2X): V2X
is widely recognized as a primary driver for task-
oriented SemCom in 6G. In cooperative perception,
platooning, and collision avoidance, vehicles must ex-
change trajectory, intent, and environment semantics
under stringent latency and reliability constraints. In
line with reproduced V2X SemCom baselines and
prior simulator-based studies, transmitting raw sen-
sor streams is bandwidth-prohibitive and often un-
necessary for decision-making, motivating semantic
V2X where vehicles share intent- or object-level em-
beddings instead of raw data [48, 49]. These meth-
ods align with L1–L3 semantic levels (Table 1), e.g.,
feature-level object embeddings or knowledge-level
maneuver graphs.
On top of semantic exchange,
reproduced multi-agent/intent-driven control at vehi-
cles and roadside units enables cooperative negoti-
ation of maneuvers and proactive resource schedul-
ing [24, 47]. Consequently, task-oriented KPIs such
as TSR for collision avoidance or platoon stabil-
ity are increasingly adopted, complementing classical
BER/throughput metrics.
Immersive XR and metaverse services: Immer-
sive XR and metaverse applications demand ultra-low
motion-to-photon latency, high-rate multi-modal de-
livery, and stable perceptual quality under mobility
and load fluctuations. Consistent with reproduced XR
SemCom pipelines and recent surveys, semantic ab-
straction can reduce redundant transmissions by prior-
itizing perceptually or task-relevant components (e.g.,
scene semantics, user intent, salient regions), partic-
ularly under constrained bandwidth [18, 16]. Mean-
while, distributed agents at edge servers and RICs or-
chestrate compute and radio resources in real time,
adapting to user density, viewpoint changes, and ser-
vice priorities, following Axis-2/Axis-3 hierarchical
control [24, 47].
Recent work demonstrates that
the semantic-aware streaming combined with agentic
edge control improves semantic fidelity and QoE sta-
bility while lowering latency relative to bit-centric de-
livery.
Industrial digital twins and massive IoT: Digi-
tal twin (DT) networks in industrial automation and
smart grids require scalable and timely synchroniza-
tion between physical processes and their cyber repli-
cas.
Both reproduced DT-oriented SemCom base-
lines and surveyed work show that massive sensor
outputs are highly redundant with respect to control
objectives, motivating semantic-aware encoding that
transmits only task-relevant knowledge (e.g., anoma-
lies, deviations, state summaries) [44]. Agentic in-
telligence embedded in edge controllers enables lo-
cal inference, predictive maintenance, and multi-agent
consensus for distributed actuation. In parallel, KG-
assisted reasoning is increasingly explored to structure
DT state, intent, and cross-layer context, improving
explainability and transferability of decisions [19, 50].
These trends point to semantic–agentic DT-RANs that
maintain control-loop stability under limited radio re-
sources.
Edge intelligence and collaborative AI services:
Edge intelligence provides a unifying scenario where
mobile devices, drones, and robots collaborate on in-
ference and learning tasks. Reproduced systems and
surveyed works commonly model these entities as co-
operative agents that share semantic representations
of local observations rather than raw data, reducing
uplink load and enabling faster collective awareness
[16]. AI-native orchestration (e.g., FL/split learning,
DT-guided scheduling) coordinates training/inference
placement across edge and cloud, while MARL or hi-
erarchical agents resolve real-time resource conflicts
[24, 23].
Across these domains, reproduced results and exist-
ing evidence suggest that semantic–agentic AI-RAN is
most beneficial when (i) task outcome dominates over
symbol fidelity, (ii) many distributed entities must co-
ordinate under real-time constraints, and (iii) network
resources are scarce and heterogeneous.
6. Challenges and Open Issues
While SemCom and agentic intelligence have pro-
gressed rapidly, our reproduced evaluations and the
latest surveyed studies highlight several failure modes,
risks, and unresolved challenges spanning semantics,
learning, systems, and standardization [18, 44, 50, 51].
6.1. Failure Modes and Risks:
While semantic–agentic AI-RAN shows consistent
gains, several failure modes must be anticipated before
large-scale deployment.
Semantic Mismatch and Representation Drift:
Semantic encoders are typically trained on specific
datasets, yet deployment traffic can be non-IID or
rapidly shifting. When the learned embedding space
no longer preserves task-relevant invariances, TSR can
drop sharply even at unchanged SNR, leading to brittle
operation. Mitigation includes online domain adapta-
tion, OOD/drift detection, and version-aware rollback
through non-RT controllers.
Towards 6G Native-AI Edge Networks: A Semantic-Aware and Agentic Intelligence Paradigm
15
Table 5
Failure Modes and Risks in Semantic–Agentic AI-RAN.
Failure mode
Root cause
Observable symptom
Impact on KPI
Mitigation
Semantic
mis-
match / represen-
tation drift
Domain shift; non-IID traffic;
outdated encoder version
TSR drops sharply at similar
SNR; embedding similarity no
longer correlates with success
L2 TSR ↓; unstable
SLA
OOD/drift detection;
online
adaptation; version-aware roll-
back
Multi-agent pol-
icy
collapse
/
non-stationarity
Mis-specified rewards; credit
assignment failure; mixed lo-
cal/global objectives
Policy oscillation; selfish equi-
libria; convergence stalls
Latency ↑; TSR ↓;
Pareto frontier de-
grades
Game-theoretic reward shap-
ing; CTDE; hierarchical roles
Semantic
adver-
sarial / injection
attacks
Small embedding perturbations
flip intent; prompt/semantic in-
jection into LFM/KG agents
Intent
flip
without
bit-
level
alarms;
unsafe
plan-
ning/execution
Safety
constraints
violated;
L3 con-
sistency ↓
Robust semantic coding; se-
mantic authentication; cross-
agent consistency checks
Multi-agent Policy Collapse under Mis-specified
Rewards:
In dense RANs, credit assignment and
mixed local/global objectives can yield unstable
MARL dynamics, including oscillatory behavior or
selfish equilibria.
Such collapse manifests as re-
turn oscillation and degraded latency/energy frontiers,
consistent with non-stationarity concerns raised in
large-scale agentic control. Remedies include game-
theoretic reward shaping, centralized training with de-
centralized execution (CTDE), and hierarchical agent
roles.
Semantic Adversarial and Injection Attacks: Be-
cause small perturbations in embedding space may flip
meaning without large bit-level deviations, semantic
layers open new attack surfaces. Adversarial semantic
perturbations or prompt-style injections into LFM/KG
agents can cause incorrect intent decoding or unsafe
planning actions, with direct consequences in V2X
or industrial DT services. Robust semantic coding,
semantic authentication, and cross-agent consistency
checks are therefore essential.
6.2. Standardization Issues
Standardization of semantic representations and
metrics: A foundational barrier is the lack of stan-
dardized semantic abstractions and fidelity measures.
Classical wireless systems rely on Shannon’s bit-level
framework with universally accepted tools such as ca-
pacity bounds and error probabilities. SemCom, how-
ever, requires task-oriented embeddings and similar-
ity metrics that capture meaning rather than symbol
sequences.
Current works employ diverse embed-
ding operators and task-specific KPIs, complicating
interoperability and cross-paper comparison [18, 44].
Emerging standardization roadmaps and community
calls emphasize the need for portable semantic in-
terfaces and KPIs, as well as semantic information-
theoretic foundations that link TSR/fidelity to resource
budgets [50].
Hierarchical semantic KPIs and standard map-
ping:
Semantic-native RANs require task-aligned
KPIs beyond BER/BLER. To make semantic evalua-
tion portable across services, we organize candidate
KPIs by semantic abstraction levels (Axis-1) and dis-
cuss how they could map to O-RAN KPM and 3GPP
service/QoS frameworks. Specifically,
L1 (feature/latent-level semantics): L1 exchanges
modality-specific latent features (e.g., image/speech
embeddings) that remain close to physical observa-
tions. Suitable KPIs include reconstruction/feature fi-
delity: MSE/NMSE, PSNR/SSIM, latent cosine sim-
ilarity or CKA; downstream task accuracy: detec-
tion mAP, segmentation IoU, ASR WER, top-1/F1
on the target model.
L1 KPIs can be reported
as near-RT xApp KPM extensions (e.g., “latent-
fidelity”, “downstream-acc”) co-measured with radio
KPIs (SINR/BLER/throughput). A practical compos-
ite KPI is Acc@BLER ≥τ, enabling a smooth bridge
to existing RAN2/RAN3 controls.
L2 (intent/task-level semantics): L2 directly con-
veys intents, task states, or decisions.
Candidate
KPIs include:
intent accuracy / command success
rate; task success rate (TSR); semantic confusion cost
that weights errors by task criticality (e.g., safety-
critical V2X). L2 KPIs naturally form semantic SLAs
at the O-RAN near-RT RIC: xApps optimize fast
control loops for TSR/intent-accuracy, while non-RT
rApps/SMO track long-term KPI curves across model
versions via A1/O1.
L3 (knowledge/graph-level semantics):
L3 ex-
changes structured knowledge (KG/scene graphs)
aimed at reasoning and explainability. Candidate KPIs
include constraint satisfaction rate (e.g., collision-risk
below threshold, industrial control constraints met);
knowledge consistency (e.g., KG triple consistency,
belief KL divergence); explainability/causality scores
evaluated by human or model-based judges. L3 KPIs
are better placed in non-RT RIC/SMO slow loops
as they rely on global context and versioned knowl-
edge bases. Standardization likely starts from SA6/CT
service definitions, then flows down into O-RAN
information-element (IE) extensions. Overall, L1–L3
KPI families provide a structured path to semantic
standardization, clarifying what should be measured
at near-RT versus non-RT timescales and how seman-
tic objectives can coexist with classical radio KPMs.
16
C. Feng, et al.
6.3. Open Issues
Scalability and stability of large-scale agentic
control: Agentic AI-RAN studies commonly rely on
MARL or intent-driven orchestration, yet performance
can degrade sharply as agent populations and coupling
graphs grow. Non-stationarity, partial observability,
delayed feedback, and signaling overhead remain bot-
tlenecks [23, 24]. Ensuring fairness and stability un-
der mixed local/global objectives is still unresolved.
Promising routes include hierarchical agents, game-
theoretic coordination, semantic message-based nego-
tiation, and hybrid learning–optimization aligned with
near-RT/non-RT placement [24, 52].
Security, trustworthiness, and explainability:
Semantic and agentic layers introduce new attack
surfaces, including adversarial semantic perturbations
and malicious agent behaviors. Since small embed-
ding perturbations can change meaning without large
bit-level deviations, classical cryptography alone is in-
sufficient [51].
Recent surveys propose combining
robust semantic modeling, secure/federated aggrega-
tion, provenance tracking (sometimes ledger-style),
and explainable AI to defend semantic–agentic loops
[51, 19]. Real-time trust frameworks compatible with
O-RAN interfaces remain open.
Energy-efficient
semantic
and
agentic
AI:
Transformer-scale semantic models and multi-agent
policies impose substantial compute footprints at the
edge. Although compression, pruning, and distillation
are widely explored,
trade-offs among semantic
fidelity, TSR, latency, and energy are still poorly
characterized [18]. Lightweight foundation models,
energy-aware semantic coding, and adaptive inference
scheduling are therefore central to deployment.
Rigorous theoretical guarantees: Current theoret-
ical understanding remains nascent.
Two-timescale
learning provides stability intuition, but global opti-
mality and guarantees in non-convex, dynamic multi-
agent environments are largely open. Key directions
include semantic information-theoretic bounds, Pareto
trade-offs among TSR/distortion/resources, and con-
vergence analyses for large-scale MARL under se-
mantic coupling [44, 50].
7. Conclusion
This work has examined the emerging paradigm
of semantic–agentic AI-RAN for 6G Native-AI net-
works, where SemCom and agentic intelligence are
treated as first-class design principles rather than aux-
iliary enhancements. Prior studies collectively indi-
cate that shifting the abstraction from bits to task-
relevant semantics improves task effectiveness and
spectrum efficiency, while distributed agentic con-
trol is essential for scalable autonomy in dense het-
erogeneous RANs.
Furthermore, we synthesized a
layered architectural view integrating semantic en-
coders/decoders, multi-agent control, and AI-native
orchestration across PHY/MAC, near-RT RIC, and
non-RT RIC placements. A unified optimization per-
spective was proposed to connect diverse works bal-
ancing semantic fidelity and task-level utility under
bandwidth, latency, and energy constraints.
Repre-
sentative case studies show consistent gains in TSR
and efficiency over bit-centric RANs and AI-driven
O-RAN baselines, while also highlighting the impor-
tance of agentic coordination and timescale separation
for training stability. Despite encouraging progress,
open challenges remain in semantic KPI standard-
ization, scalable trustworthy multi-agent coordina-
tion, semantic/agentic security, and energy-efficient
deployment of foundation-scale models. Advancing
this vision will require tighter coupling among theory,
prototyping, and standardization efforts in 3GPP and
O-RAN, supported by reproducible benchmarks and
interoperable semantic/agentic interfaces.
References
[1] H. Ahmadi, M. Rahmani, S. B. Chetty, E. E. Tsiropoulou,
H. Arslan, M. Debbah, T. Q. S. Quek, Toward sustainability in
6G and beyond: Challenges and opportunities of open RAN,
IEEE Communications Standards Magazine 9 (3) (2025) 126–
135.
[2] M. Na, J. Lee, G. Choi, T. Yu, J. Choi, J. Lee, S. Bahk, Op-
erator’s perspective on 6G: 6G services, vision, and spectrum,
IEEE Communications Magazine 62 (8) (2024) 178–184.
[3] B. Brik, H. Chergui, L. Zanzi, F. Devoti, A. Ksentini, M. S.
Siddiqui, X. Costa-P´erez, C. Verikoukis, Explainable AI in
6G O-RAN: A tutorial and survey on architecture, use cases,
challenges, and future research, IEEE Communications Sur-
veys & Tutorials 27 (5) (2025) 2826–2859.
[4] X. Lin, L. Kundu, C. Dick, S. Velayutham, Embracing AI in
5G-Advanced Toward 6G: A Joint 3GPP and O-RAN perspec-
tive, IEEE Communications Standards Magazine 7 (4) (2023)
76–83.
[5] P. S. Upadhyaya, N. Tripathi, J. Gaeddert, J. H. Reed, Open
AI cellular (OAIC): An open source 5G O-RAN testbed for
design and testing of AI-based ran management algorithms,
IEEE Network 37 (5) (2023) 7–15.
[6] B. Tang, V. K. Shah, V. Marojevic, J. H. Reed, AI testing
framework for Next-G O-RAN networks: Requirements, de-
sign, and research opportunities, IEEE Wireless Communica-
tions 30 (1) (2023) 70–77.
[7] M. Kouchaki, S. B. H. Natanzi, M. Zhang, B. Tang, V. Maro-
jevic, O-RAN performance analyzer: Platform design, devel-
opment, and deployment, IEEE Communications Magazine
63 (2) (2025) 152–159.
[8] X. Chen, Z. Guo, X. Wang, C. Feng, H. H. Yang, S. Han,
X. Wang, T. Q. S. Quek, Toward 6G Native-AI network:
Foundation model-based cloud-edge-end collaboration frame-
work, IEEE Communications Magazine 63 (8) (2025) 23–30.
[9] D. N. Nguyen, B. Chen, T. Q. S. Quek, Operation-aware dig-
ital twin for improving performance and sustainability of AI-
driven radio access networks, in: IEEE INFOCOM 2025 -
IEEE Conference on Computer Communications Workshops
(INFOCOM WKSHPS), 2025, pp. 1–6.
[10] S. Guo, A. Zhang, Y. Wang, C. Feng, T. Q. S. Quek, Semantic-
enabled 6g communication:
A task-oriented and privacy-
preserving perspective, IEEE Network (2025) 1–1.
[11] X. Wang, D. Ye, C. Feng, H. H. Yang, X. Chen, T. Q. S. Quek,
Trustworthy image semantic communication with genai: Ex-
plainablity, controllability, and efficiency, IEEE Wireless
Communications 32 (2) (2025) 68–75.
[12] Y. Wang, R. Li, C. Wang, J. Ye, C. Feng, S. Guo, Collab-
orative learning for task-oriented semantic communications:
Towards 6G Native-AI Edge Networks: A Semantic-Aware and Agentic Intelligence Paradigm
17
Overcoming data mismatch between transceivers, IEEE Open
Journal of the Communications Society 6 (2025) 5778–5794.
[13] M. Tang, C. Feng, G. Min, T. Q. S. Quek, H-infinity tracking
for intelligent edge-controlled systems over fading channels
in ai-ran, IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology (2025)
1–6.
[14] T. Park, E. Hong, Y.-S. Jeon, N. Lee, Y. Kim, Robust deep
joint source-channel coding for task-oriented semantic com-
munications, arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.12907.
[15] D. G¨und¨uz, M. A. Wigger, T.-Y. Tung, P. Zhang, Y. Xiao, Joint
source–channel coding: Fundamentals and recent progress in
practical designs, Proceedings of the IEEE (2024) 1–32.
[16] F. Jiang, L. Dong, Y. Peng, K. Wang, K. Yang, C. Pan, X. You,
Large AI model empowered multimodal semantic communi-
cations, IEEE Communications Magazine 63 (1) (2025) 76–
82.
[17] C. Liang, H. Du, Y. Sun, D. Niyato, J. Kang, D. Zhao,
M. A. Imran, Generative ai-driven semantic communication
networks: Architecture, technologies, and applications, IEEE
Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking
11 (1) (2025) 27–47.
[18] L. X. Nguyen, A. D. Raha, P. S. Aung, D. Niyato, Z. Han, C. S.
Hong, A contemporary survey on semantic communications:
Theory of mind, generative ai, and deep joint source-channel
coding, IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials (2025) 1–
1.
[19] Y. Huang, X. You, H. Zhan, S. He, N. Fu, W. Xu, Learning
wireless data knowledge graph for green intelligent commu-
nications: Methodology and experiments, IEEE Transactions
on Mobile Computing 23 (12) (2024) 12298–12312.
[20] N. Hello, P. Di Lorenzo, E. C. Strinati, Semantic communica-
tion enhanced by knowledge graph representation learning, in:
2024 IEEE 25th International Workshop on Signal Processing
Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC), 2024, pp.
876–880.
[21] X. Du, T. Wang, Q. Feng, C. Ye, T. Tao, L. Wang, Y. Shi,
M. Chen, Multi-agent reinforcement learning for dynamic re-
source management in 6G in-X subnetworks, IEEE Transac-
tions on Wireless Communications 22 (3) (2023) 1900–1914.
[22] Y. Zhang, D. Guo, Multi-agent reinforcement learning for
multi-cell spectrum and power allocation, IEEE Transactions
on Communications 73 (8) (2025) 5980–5992.
[23] Z. Liu, J. Zhang, E. Shi, Z. Liu, D. Niyato, B. Ai, X. Shen,
Graph neural network meets multi-agent reinforcement learn-
ing: Fundamentals, applications, and future directions, IEEE
Wireless Communications 31 (6) (2024) 39–47.
[24] A. Elyasi, A. Ashdown, K. M. Rumman, F. Restuccia, O-RAN
xApps: Survey and research challenges, Computer Network-
sAvailable at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5236117.
[25] X. Wu, J. Farooq, Y. Wang, J. Chen, LLM-xApp: A large lan-
guage model empowered radio resource management xApp
for 5G O-RAN, in: FutureG / NDSS Workshop, 2025, pp. 1–
5.
[26] L. Bao, S. Yun, J. Lee, T. Q. S. Quek, LLM-hRIC: LLM-
empowered Hierarchical RAN Intelligent Control for O-RAN,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.18062.
[27] A. Salama, Z. Nezami, M. M. H. Qazzaz, M. Hafeez, S. A. R.
Zaidi, Edge agentic AI framework for autonomous network
optimisation in O-RAN, arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.21696.
[28] M. M. H. Qazzaz, et al., Machine learning-based xApp for dy-
namic resource allocation in O-RAN systems, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.07643.
[29] T. V. Ngo, M. V. Ngo, B. Chen, G. Gemmi, E. Baena,
M. Polese, T. Melodia, W. Chien, T. Quek, Consistent and
repeatable testing of O-RAN distributed unit (O-DU) across
continents, in: 2024 IEEE 100th Vehicular Technology Con-
ference (VTC2024-Fall), 2024, pp. 1–5.
[30] N.-B.-L. Tran, M. V. Ngo, Y. H. Pua, T.-L. Le, B. Chen,
T. Quek, Ai-driven rapps for reducing radio access network
interference in real-world 5G deployment, in: IEEE INFO-
COM 2024 - IEEE Conference on Computer Communications
Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), 2024, pp. 1–2.
[31] T.-T. Nguyen, M. V. Ngo, B. Chen, M. Kuchitsu, S. Wai,
S. Kawai, K. Suzuki, E. W. Koo, T. Quek, Consistent and
repeatable testing of mMIMO O-RU across labs: A japan-
singapore experience, in: 2024 IEEE 100th Vehicular Tech-
nology Conference (VTC2024-Fall), 2024, pp. 1–5.
[32] Y. Ren, L. Zhou, S. Guo, X. Qiu, T. Q. S. Quek, Traffic dig-
ital twin-enabled orchestration and scheduling in O-RAN: A
multi-timescale joint optimization approach, IEEE Transac-
tions on Mobile Computing (2025) 1–18.
[33] S. Li, Y. Wang, S. Guo, C. Feng, Task-oriented communica-
tion for graph data: A graph information bottleneck approach,
IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Net-
working 11 (3) (2025) 1723–1737.
[34] M. Xu, D. Niyato, J. Kang, Z. Xiong, S. Mao, Z. Han, D. I.
Kim, K. B. Letaief, When large language model agents meet
6G networks: Perception, grounding, and alignment, IEEE
Wireless Communications 31 (6) (2024) 63–71.
[35] J. Tong, J. Shao, Q. Wu, W. Guo, Z. Li, Z. Lin, J. Zhang,
WirelessAgent: Large language model agents for intelligent
wireless networks, arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.07964.
[36] A. Zolghadr, J. F. Santos, L. A. DaSilva, J. Kibiłda, Learning
and reconstructing conflicts in o-ran: A graph neural network
approach, arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.14119.
[37] M. A. Shami, J. Yan, E. T. Fapi, O-RAN xApps conflict man-
agement using graph convolutional networks, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.03523.
[38] S. Jiang, B. Lin, Y. Wu, Y. Gao, LINKs: large language model
integrated management for 6G empowered digital twin net-
works, in: 2024 IEEE 100th Vehicular Technology Confer-
ence (VTC2024-Fall), 2024, pp. 1–6.
[39] Z. Xiao, C. Ye, Y. Hu, H. Yuan, Y. Huang, Y. Feng,
L. Cai, J. Chang, LLM Agents as 6G Orchestrator:
A
paradigm for task-oriented communications, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.03688.
[40] M. Haider, I. Ahmed, Z. Hassan, K. Hasan, H. V. Poor, Llm-
integrated digital twins for hierarchical resource allocation in
6g networks, arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.18293.
[41] C. You, X. He, Y. Sun, G. Feng, T. Q. S. Quek, GreenRAN:
A channel-aware green O-RAN framework for NextG mobile
systems, in: IEEE INFOCOM 2025 - IEEE Conference on
Computer Communications, 2025, pp. 1–10.
[42] Y. Sun, L. Zhang, L. Guo, J. Li, D. Niyato, Y. Fang, S-ran:
Semantic-aware radio access networks, IEEE Communica-
tions Magazine 63 (4) (2025) 207–213.
[43] W. Zhang, Q. Wu, F. Pingyi, K. Wang, N. Cheng, W. Chen,
K. B. Letaief, Semantic-aware resource management for C-
V2X platooning via multi-agent reinforcement learning, arXiv
preprint arXiv:2411.04672.
[44] Y. E. Sagduyu, T. Erpek, A. Yener, S. Ulukus, Will 6G be se-
mantic communications? opportunities and challenges from
task oriented and secure communications to integrated sens-
ing, IEEE Network 38 (6) (2024) 72–80.
[45] M. Zhang, M. Abdi, V. R. Dasari, F. Restuccia, Semantic edge
computing and semantic communications in 6G networks: A
comprehensive survey, arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.18199.
[46] J. Cong, G. Cheng, C. You, X. Huang, W. Wu, Two-timescale
digital twin assisted model inference and retraining for edge
intelligence, arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.18329.
[47] R. Barker, A. E. Dorcheh, T. Seyfi, F. Afghah, REAL: rein-
forcement learning-enabled xApps for experimental closed-
loop optimization in O-RAN with OSC RIC and srsRAN,
in: 2025 IEEE International Conference on Communications
Workshops (ICC Workshops), 2025, pp. 389–395.
[48] T. Lyu, M. Noor-A-Rahim, A. O’Driscoll, D. Pesch, Seman-
tic vehicle-to-everything (V2X) communications towards 6G,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.17186.
[49] L. Lusvarghi, J. Gozalvez, B. Coll-Perales, M. I. Khan,
M. Sepulcre, S. Ucar, O. Altintas, The search for relevance:
A context-aware paradigm shift in semantic v2x communica-
tions, arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.07394.
[50] P. Zhang, et al., Towards native AI in 6G standardization:
The roadmap of semantic communications, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2509.12758.
[51] R. Meng, et al., A survey of secure semantic communications,
18
C. Feng, et al.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.00842.
[52] P. Gajjar, V. K. Shah, ORANSight-2.0: Foundational LLMs
for O-RAN, IEEE Transactions on Machine Learning in Com-
munications and Networking 3 (2025) 903–920.
