1
Towards AI-Native RAN: An Operator’s Perspective of
6G Day 1 Standardization
Nan Li, Qi Sun, Lehan Wang, Xiaofei Xu, Jinri Huang, Chunhui Liu, Jing Gao,
Yuhong Huang, and Chih-Lin I, Life Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning (AI/ML)
has become the most certain and prominent feature of 6G mobile
networks. Unlike 5G, where AI/ML was not natively integrated
but rather an add-on feature over existing architecture, 6G
shall incorporate AI from the onset to address its complexity
and support ubiquitous AI applications. Based on our extensive
mobile network operation and standardization experience from
2G to 5G, this paper explores the design and standardization
principles of AI-Native radio access networks (RAN) for 6G, with
a particular focus on its critical Day 1 architecture, functionalities
and capabilities. We investigate the framework of AI-Native RAN
and present its three essential capabilities to shed some light on
the standardization direction; namely, AI-driven RAN process-
ing/optimization/automation, reliable AI lifecycle management
(LCM), and AI-as-a-Service (AIaaS) provisioning. The standard-
ization of AI-Native RAN, in particular the Day 1 features,
including an AI-Native 6G RAN architecture, were proposed.
For validation, a large-scale field trial with over 5000 5G-A base
stations have been built and delivered significant improvements
in average air interface latency, root cause identification, and
network energy consumption with the proposed architecture and
the supporting AI functions. This paper aims to provide a Day
1 framework for 6G AI-Native RAN standardization design,
balancing technical innovation with practical deployment.
Index Terms—AI-Native RAN, standardization, 6G.
I. INTRODUCTION
Artificial Intelligence (AI) technology has made unprece-
dented progress in recent years, giving rise to novel service
applications that may fundamentally change the way our
societies produce and consume. AI technology is also being
retrofitted into the mobile networks. In the past few years,
the telecom industry has gradually recognized its potential
in enhancing network performance, optimizing user experi-
ence, reducing power consumption, and automating network
management. Following the endeavors in the core network
and the management domain [1–3], additional support for
AI in virtually all protocol layers is being introduced to the
RAN, which largely determines the performance of the mobile
networks [4–6]. However, the AI functionality introduced in
5G has largely followed an add-on paradigm, which has
constrained the potential of AI by legacy architecture, pre-
existing protocols, and limited system flexibility.
The deep convergence of RAN and AI is a cornerstone
for the evolution towards 6G [7]. First, AI is promising in
Nan Li (corresponding author) is with Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, China, and also with China Mobile Research Institute,
China; Nan Li, Qi Sun, Lehan Wang, Xiaofei Xu, Jinri Huang, Chunhui Liu,
Jing Gao and Chih-Lin I are with China Mobile Research Institute, China;
Yuhong Huang is with China Mobile Research Institute, China, and also with
ZGC Institute of Ubiquitous-X innovation and Applications, China.
addressing some of the most sophisticated challenges in 6G
RAN. For example, it may enable low-complexity signal pro-
cessing for massive Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (MIMO),
a technology that has been used to combat the adverse and
time-varying radio channels, whose computational complexity
rises steeply as hundreds of antenna elements will be employed
in a 6G radio unit. Another example is the radio resources
allocation and scheduling tasks in complex network topologies
with massive User Equipments (UEs). Those tasks typically
involve large-scale and non-linear problems for which real-
time algorithms have to compromise performance, or even
problems that are difficult to model mathematically. Moreover,
the distributed RAN sites equipped with AI capabilities are
envisioned to serve as the key enablers for the pervasive
AI applications, which would demand both low latency and
high compute. To that end, the 6G RAN must be designed
with AI in a native approach. This includes both AI for
RAN—leveraging AI to enhance RAN performance, adapt-
ability, and efficiency—and RAN for AI, which provides
beyond communication support to enable pervasive, high-
performance AI applications across the network. By unlocking
new levels of service capability, energy efficiency, operational
intelligence, and cost-effectiveness, AI-Native RAN will serve
as a cornerstone of 6G—and ultimately determine its ability
to succeed at scale and deliver on its transformative promise.
Though the concept of AI-Native RAN for 6G has gained
traction in the telecom industry, a general consensus on its
definition and its pathway is yet to be achieved. Various
interpretations can be seen from the stakeholders with diverse
perspectives. To list a few, Ref. [8] highlights a converged
communication and computing architecture that enables dy-
namic AI service deployment and task-oriented connectivity.
Ref. [9] interprets AI-Native concept as the pervasive AI
capabilities design, deployment, operation, and maintenance.
Ref. [10] is focused on the air interface and proposes AI/ML
integration for dynamic adaptation to hardware constraints,
radio environments, and application requirements. Ref. [11]
discusses several possible interpretations from a standard-
ization angle, such as the AI/ML availability and flexibility
for AI/ML based implementations. Ref. [12] decomposes the
concept into three aspects, namely “AI for RAN”, “AI and
RAN” and “AI on RAN”. Refs. [13, 14] claim AI/ML as
the foundation for RAN evolution, enabling hierarchical and
distributed intelligence across the network. Without a clear
and shared understanding of the scope and goals of AI-Native
RAN, standards development organizations (SDOs) may suffer
from ambiguities, misalignment, or even conflicting efforts in
their 6G standardization.
arXiv:2507.08403v1  [cs.NI]  11 Jul 2025
2
In the process of 6G RAN standardization, the Day 1
standards have special significance against the later releases.
Failure to address the AI-Native concept in initial standards
could perpetuate the ‘AI-as-afterthought’ limitations we faced
in 5G, and eventually undermine the commercial viability of
AI-Native RAN in 6G. It should also be noted that the practical
needs and concerns of mobile network operators (MNOs)
should be carefully considered and reflected in standardization
efforts.The MNOs have been confronted with many diffi-
culties, including inefficient utilization of 5G infrastructure,
limited sources of revenue, slow innovations, etc. It is desired
that novel architectural and functional designs in 6G AI-Native
RAN can help to tackle those challenges and ensure a healthy
and sustainable telecom ecosystem.
This paper aims to investigate the connotations and impacts
of AI-Native RAN from the perspective of a MNO. The main
contributions of this paper is as follows. First, We investigates
the essential capabilities of AI-Native RAN. Furthermore,
Day 1 standardization principles, design considerations and
the essential features are presented with an AI-Native RAN
architecture proposed, drawing from 4G/5G standardization
experience and commercial deployment insights. The potential
collaboration between 3GPP and other standard development
organizations (SDOs) are also investigated. These guidelines
aim to ensure that AI-Native RAN capabilities can be fully
realized from the first release of 6G and support their sus-
tainable evolution within an open ecosystem. Finally, we
share a national wide, large-scale effort involving over 5000
base stations in 5G-Advanced (5G-A) networks as an early
exploration toward AI-Native design. The field trials validates
the key architectural features and three typical use cases,
offering valuable practical insights for the path toward a fully
realized AI-Native RAN in 6G.
This paper is structured as follows. A brief review of the
5G/5G-A progress in the AI/ML related work is conducted
in Section II, along with remaining issues for 6G, and in
particular for 6G RAN. The concept, essential capabilities
and day 1 standardization considerations of AI-Native RAN
are analyzed in details in Section III. The overall standardiza-
tion considerations, key designs on architecture and building
blocks, and the collaboration among SDOs are presented in
Section IV. In Section V, the large-scale field trials by China
Mobile are discussed. The conclusion of this paper is given in
Section V.
II. REVIEW OF AI/ML INTEGRATION IN 5G/5G-A
The pivot role of AI/ML for RAN evolution has become
prominent in the 5G timeframe, with notable progress achieved
in several SDOs.
In 3GPP, the standardization efforts on AI/ML highlight
a comprehensive approach, despite constrained the existing
5G architecture. While the service and system aspects (SA)
work groups (WGs) engage in the relevant activities on various
aspects (i.e., service requirements, core network, management,
security, and application enablement, see [1–3, 15–18]), the
RAN WGs focus on the RAN-specific AI/ML use cases,
functionalities, and the associated LCM over the air interface
and the Xn interface. The AI/ML enabled use cases include
channel state information (CSI) feedback, beam management,
positioning, mobility, network energy saving and load balanc-
ing, with the promise to enhance the air interface efficiency,
enable proactive mobility management, and optimize resource
utilization [4–6]. It is worth noting that 3GPP RAN has
been developing its AI/ML framework that depicts the general
aspects of an AI/ML workflow, and a 3GPP-wide alignment
on the AI/ML framework as well as terminology has been
underway [19]. It is expected that a unified AI/ML framework
will be in place soon for the end-to-end system and across
SDOs.
O-RAN pioneered the architectural innovations towards an
AI-driven RAN since its birth in 2018, highlighting an open
and modular methodology. Some new components dedicated
to RAN intelligence are introduced, namely the near-real-
time RAN intelligent controller (Near-RT RIC) and the non-
real-time RAN intelligent controller (Non-RT RIC) [20–22].
Thanks to the open interfaces, O-RAN features fine-grained
data collection in RAN, and extensive support for AI/ML
workflows across Near-RT RIC and Non-RT RIC. In addition,
both RICs feature modularity with their cloud-native software
(termed xApp and rApp) that can be developed and deployed
on demand, enabling light-weighted and customizable AI/ML
solutions for RAN. With its RIC-enabled centralized opti-
mization, O-RAN complements the 3GPP RAN with more
AI/ML use cases [23] including traffic steering, quality of ser-
vice (QoS)/quality of experience (QoE) optimization, massive
MIMO optimization, etc.
Apart from 3GPP and O-RAN, several projects in ITU and
ETSI are also relevant to the convergence of AI and RAN.
ITU leads the global initiative on the overall AI/ML related
frameworks for the telecom networks, providing guidance and
methodology for various SDOs. Under the ITU umbrella, the
ML5G Focus Group (FG-ML5G) was formed to specify the
architectural framework for the application of AI/ML in future
networks [24], and followed by the Autonomous Networks
Focus Group (FG-AN) that aimed to minimize human inter-
ventions in network management and control from with the
help of AI/ML models [25]. In ETSI, Experiential Networked
Intelligence (ENI) [26] and Zero-Touch Service and Network
Management (ZSM) [27] projects were conducted, where
AI/ML is denoted as the key enabler for cross-domain and
automated network management.
Thanks to the extensive standardization work in the past few
years, people now have a better understanding of what are,
and what are not, in the scope of standardization with respect
to AI/ML. An AI/ML model is essentially an algorithm,
but it is different from the non-AI/ML-based algorithms in
that it can be generated (i.e., trained) from the data from
RAN and UE more dynamically. With that in mind, most
of the efforts in the standards so far are devoted to the
management/control of AI/ML workflow, including but not
limited to, model identification and meta, awareness of rel-
evant RAN/UE capability, data collection aspects (protocols,
data types and formats, etc.), mechanisms for AI/ML model
delivery/transfer, deployment/update, activation/deactivation,
and fallback to non-AI/ML-based algorithms. Besides, the
3
additional requirements from dedicated AI/ML infrastructure
may have an impact the RAN architecture, in order to optimize
resource utilization and energy consumption for the MNOs. On
the other hand, similar to the non-AI/ML-based algorithms,
the weights of an AI/ML model and how it is trained are out
of standardization scope. It remains for further investigation
whether certain generic model structures (e.g., convolutional
neural network, CNN) and associated complexity metrics can
be standardized, to facilitate use cases where two-sided/shared
models are generated and employed, though many vendors
have concern on the disclosure of proprietary information.
Among the remarkable achievements, a number of deficien-
cies in the 5G/5G-A integration of AI/ML can be observed
from the following perspectives:
• Organization of work: the standardization of AI/ML
capabilities in the different WGs of 3GPP as well as
other SDOs was launched with a bottom-up pattern,
resulting in huge overhead to avoid inconsistencies in the
end-to-end system. The coordination among the SDOs
are also usually slow and inefficient, which may cause
overlapping scope of work.
• Architecture: the integration of AI/ML for 5G systems
has been constrained by the existing architectural designs,
which is basically an “add-on” approach that limits
any new functions/functionalities in making the best of
AI/ML techniques.
• Use cases: The exploration of AI/ML-enabled use cases
was started in the management and the core network
domains and extended to RAN with selected use cases
recently. More use cases remain to be investigated in the
6G era to fully unleash the potential of AI/ML in the
link-level and area-level RAN performance.
• AI/ML data collection: In front of the massive and dis-
tinct data collection requirements from various use cases
and tasks (e.g., AI/ML model training and inference),
the efficiency of data collection mechanisms counts in
the overall system performance. This issue is especially
severe in RAN, where both the existing control plane
and user plane solutions have some limitations. Besides,
controllability and observability in the process have been
the concern of MNOs. Other aspects associated with
AI/ML data, including cross-domain data collection, data
cleaning/pre-processing and storage, also call for unified
designs in the standards.
• AI/ML model: First, the 5G AI/ML capabilities are
mostly based on off-line trained models, whose perfor-
mance may deteriorate in a realistic environment when
the distributions of training data and real-time input data
are mismatched. To address that issue, online model
training and fine-tuning aided by pre-validation is most
promising. Second, the existing performance monitoring
designs are limited to a per-use-case basis, and a more
systematic approach remains to be established. Third, the
application of AI/ML models in RAN is still in an early
stage, with limited support, if any, for the cutting-edge
model structures and paradigms like federated learning
and large models.
• AI computing resource: The impact of AI computing re-
source in the distributed scenarios should be emphasized
in the standardization rather than left to implementations.
The major MNOs are in deep concern with the utilization
efficiency of AI computing resources in the distributed
RAN nodes, as such hardware is typically expensive and
energy-hungry.
• RAN services: While RAN is traditionally regarded as
a dump pipe for communication services only, the emer-
gence of AI applications and devices (e.g., AI wearables)
that require ultra-low latency computing has opened new
opportunities for 6G RAN. The 6G RAN can not only
enhance user experience with awareness of the AI/ML
service traffic, but also be leveraged to produce new
types of services beyond communication, e.g, edge AI
computing, which could create new sources of revenue
for the MNOs.
III. AI-NATIVE RAN: CONCEPT AND ESSENTIAL
CAPABILITIES
The experience gained from AI/ML integration in 5G and
5G-A highlights both the potential and the limitations of
current approaches. While notable progress has been made, the
fragmented and case-specific nature of existing work reveals
the absence of a unified, long-term architectural vision for the
deep fusion of AI and RAN. This calls for a fundamental
paradigm shift in 6G design, where AI is not merely an add-
on, but a native capability embedded throughout the RAN.
A well-articulated concept of AI-Native RAN is essential to
align standardization efforts, steer architectural evolution, and
provide clear, unified guidance for future product development.
This mirrors the pivotal role played by the Cloud Native
Computing Foundation (CNCF) in shaping the standardized
concept of cloud-native computing, which subsequently laid
the foundation for cloud evolution.
From an operator’s perspective, we attempt to articulate
a concept of AI-Native RAN, inspired by the cloud-native
paradigm. In this view, AI-Native RAN is a radio access net-
work fundamentally driven by AI, with AI deeply embedded
in its functions, architectures, protocols, and operations. Such
integration empowers intelligent RAN optimization and au-
tomation, enabling real-time, efficient, and diversified service
delivery across communication, computing, and AI tasks for
ubiquitous applications.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, realizing the vision of AI-Native
RAN requires three essential capabilities. The first is AI-driven
RAN processing, optimization, and automation, which enables
intelligent control across the air interface, RAN management
and resource optimization; this will be discussed in Section
III.A. The second is efficient, controllable, and reliable AI
lifecycle management (LCM), covering data collection, model
management, and collaborative computing, which will be de-
tailed in Sections III.B, III.C, and III.D, respectively. The third
is AI-as-a-Service (AIaaS) provisioning, which transforms the
RAN into a unified platform for both communication and AI
applications, and will be introduced in Section III.E.
4
AI-native RAN
02
03
01
Data services for AI
 
 
 
 
RAN AI computing
services
AIaaS provisioning
(Section III. E)
Efficient Data Collection
(Section III. B)
Controllable Model 
management (Section III. C)
Collaborative Distributed 
Computing (Section III. D)
Efficient, controllable and highly 
reliable AI LCM
AI for RAN resources 
control and optimization
AI-Driven RAN Processing, Optimization 
and Automation (Section III. A)
Connection Assurance for AI 
services
AI for Air Interface
AI for RAN management 
and orchestration
Fig. 1: Three essential capabilities of AI-Native RAN.
A. AI-Driven RAN Processing, Optimization, and Automation
With the increasing complexity of modern wireless net-
works, traditional rule-based or model-driven RAN optimiza-
tion methods are facing growing challenges. In contrast, AI
technologies demonstrate unique advantages in handling com-
plexity, scale, and uncertainty. In the context of RAN process-
ing, optimization, and automation, AI offers three key capabil-
ities: the ability to learn in scenarios where explicit modeling
is infeasible, the capability to make real-time decisions in
large-scale, high-dimensional environments, and the power to
perform accurate prediction and proactive adaptation based on
complex spatiotemporal patterns for proactive optimization.
Overall, these capabilities position AI as a powerful enabler
across physical layer (L1), data link layer (L2) and network
layer (L3). Table I shows typical use cases of AI for air
interface (L1), and AI for resources control and optimization
(L2/L3) in a systematic view.
The models applied to these use cases must first undergo
training, testing, and validation to ensure the performance of
the aforementioned AI-driven RAN processing, optimization,
and automation in practical systems. Fig. 2 shows the four
typical approaches on how AI model can be trained, delivered
and deployed in RAN.
Standardization Considerations: 5G standardization has
pioneered valuable AI applications in single RAN modules,
laying the groundwork for broader AI integration. In 6G, it
is expected to advance beyond single-module toward more
complex and high-value use cases, such as joint optimization
across multiple modules and cross-layer AI coordination, aim-
ing to fully harness AI for ultra-reliable and high-performance
user experiences. Promising use cases may include AI-based
transceivers, power amplifier (PA) nonlinearity compensation
and reference signal (RS) overhead reduction, etc. To support
the prioritization of use cases, a comprehensive and system-
Cloud owned by
UE providers
Model training
UE 
Core Cloud
Model training
UE 
BS 
RAN Cloud
Model training
UE 
OAM Cloud
Model training
UE 
BS 
Model delivery 
for UE
Model delivery 
for BS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 2: Four potential AI model training, delivery and deploy
modes in AI-Native RAN. (a) UE cloud training; (b) core
network training; (c) BS training; (d) operation administration
and maintenance (OAM) cloud training.
5
TABLE I: Typical use cases for AI-driven RAN processing, optimization and automation
scenarios
use case
key challenges of
non AI-based solutions
AI inference
location
potential AI methods
& parameter scale
research
status
AI for RAN
resources control
and optimization
load
balancing
BS-side
DNN(<1M)
LSTM(<10M)
DRL(<10M)
5G-A 3GPP Release 18,
O-RAN
mobility
management
passive optimization
degrades the
performance;
high-dimensional,
complex
and often non-convex
optimization problems;
hard to find the
optimal solution
in a real time manner
UE-side,
BS-side
random forest
gradient boosting
LSTM(<1M)
5G-A 3GPP Release 18/19,
O-RAN
network
energy saving
BS-side
DNN(<1M)
LSTM(<10M)
DRL(<10M)
5G-A 3GPP Release 18,
field trial in 5G-A
commercial network,
O-RAN
network slicing
LSTM(<10M)
GRU(<10M)
Transformer(10M-1B)
double dueling DQN(<1M)
5G-A 3GPP Release 19,
O-RAN
capacity
and coverage
optimization
DRL(<10M)
GNN(<10M)
LSTM(<10M)
Transformer(10M-1B)
multi-user
scheduling and
resources allocation
DNN(<1M)
DRL(<10M)
6G candidate use case,
O-RAN
QoS/QoE optimization
and service level
agreement
(SLA) assurance
k-means(<1M)
DNN(<1M)
CNN(<1M)
DRL(<10M)
field trial in 5G-A
commercial network,
6G candidate use case,
O-RAN
AI for
air interface
positioning
limited accuracy
UE-side,
BS-side,
LMF-side
DNN(<30M)
CNN(<30M)
5G-A 3GPP Release 18/19
beam management
limited accuracy in
medium and
high-speed scenario;
unacceptable overhead
for reasonable accuracy
BS-side,
UE-side
CNN(<10M)
LSTM(<10M)
Transformers(<10M)
CSI compression
theoretically intractable
to model/formulate
two-sided
model
CNN(<10M)
LSTM(<10M)
Transformers(<10M)
CSI prediction
outdated and
limited accuracy
BS-Side,
UE-side
MLP-Mixer(<10M)
2D-FCN(<1M)
CNN(<1M)
AI based
receiver /
transceiver
theoretically intractable
to model/formulate
ESN(<10M)
Transformers(<10M)
6G candidate use case
PA non-linearity
compensation
theoretically intractable
to model/formulate
ESN(<10M)
Interference
prediction
and handling
outdated and
limited accuracy
LSTM(<10M)
Transformers(<10M)
RS overhead
reduction
(incl. superimposed
pilot)
high reference
signal overhead
BS-Side
CNN(<10M)
LSTM(<10M)
Transformers(<10M)
atic performance evaluation framework is essential. It should
go beyond basic accuracy or throughput metrics. Instead, it
must incorporate multi-dimensional criteria, including energy
efficiency, model generalization capability, and overall system
cost, which encompasses AI-specific overheads such as com-
putation, data collection, and storage. While specific models
and algorithms will typically remain outside the scope of
standardization, key enablers—such as data collection mech-
anisms, model management procedures, and distributed AI
computing frameworks—need to be standardized for scalable
and interoperable AI-native RAN deployments.
B. Efficient Data collection
The current 5G RAN protocol design is oriented to the
communication purposes but less to the needs of AI/ML data
collection. A comprehensive review of existing data collection
approaches was conducted in 3GPP RAN [5]. On the air inter-
face, the control plane suffers from scalability in the maximum
payload size. While the user plane has fewer restrictions in
the traffic data volume, the data flows are terminated by the
user plane function (UPF) in the core network and may be
subject to charging, making it less favorable for AI/ML tasks
in RAN. Besides, when a large volume of data is collected
over the air, there exists a risk in draining the radio link and
impeding the basic connectivity services in RAN. In addition,
multiple aspects, including data privacy and security, also pose
challenges for data collection. In Release 19, the different
paths for data collection from UE (data collection server in
OTT, in the core or in the OAM) are under discussion in
3GPP RAN under the existing 5G framework [11]. However,
6
Fig. 3: AI radio bearer.
when it evolves to 6G, new designs shall be considered for
native data collection support in RAN.
1) Dedicated AI radio bearer: A novel type of radio
bearers [28] may be defined to support AI/ML related data
delivery on the air interface as shown in Fig. 3. Such a new
radio bearer is solely managed by RAN, which allows RAN
to establish and configure it dynamically upon the demand
of AI/ML use cases in 6G RAN. As per the payload, the
radio bearer is capable of multiple AI/ML related data types,
including but not limited to, the AI/ML training data, the
AI/ML models, and other enhancement data that may assist
the AI/ML workflows (e.g., the performance metrics of AI/ML
models). It is expected that the new radio bearers will ensure
both flexibility and efficiency in the AI/ML workflows in 6G
RAN. In addition to the new radio bearer, a new data tunnel
may be specified on the network interfaces that interconnect
the 6G RAN nodes, to enable the exchange of AI/ML related
data. For example, a 6G RAN node can collect data from
adjacent nodes or their served UEs for centralized model
training, and thereafter, the node can deliver the trained models
to adjacent nodes or the UEs on demand.
2) Cross-domain data collection: The 6G AI-Native RAN
is expected to enable cross-domain AI/ML for end-to-end ser-
vice assurance, which will entail cross-domain data collection.
One use case is the service-aware RAN optimization for AI
services. The 6G RAN can optimize its behavior by acquir-
ing the real-time traffic characteristics from the application
servers. The QoE metrics for AI/ML service may also be
useful in assisting RAN to improve the user’s experience in
a more specialized approach, for instance, the time to first
token (TTFT) in large language model (LLM) inference. Upon
the service-layer information, the AI-Native RAN is able to
employ service-specific optimizations such as PDU set map-
ping and DRB configuration. Meanwhile, the real-time RAN
performance metrics and predictions may also be collected by
the core network to adjust its QoS configurations and UPF
behavior more dynamically. With the diverse data sources and
collectors, it would be more efficient for 6G RAN to provide a
holistic framework for cross-domain data collection, which is
beyond the 5G network capability exposure. Fig. 4 illustrates
the cross-domain data collection envisioned in 6G.
3) Task-driven customizable RAN data collection mech-
anism: Beyond minimization of drive test (MDT), perfor-
mance measurements (PMs) and measurement reports (MRs),
a new data collection mechanism is essential to fulfill the
diverse requirements on data collection in 6G RAN. The new
mechanism highlights real-time, fine-granularity and flexibil-
Fig. 4: Cross-domain data collection.
ity. Compared with the OAM-oriented mechanisms that work
with about 15 minutes report interval, the new mechanism
controlled by the 6G RAN nodes can support a latency of
10 ms or lower, for the real-time AI/ML inference tasks. It
is also capable of RAN data collection on a specific UE,
so as to enable more fine-grained AI/ML optimization tasks.
Moreover, the new mechanism is specialized to the reduction
of unnecessary data collection, e.g., to train an AI/ML model
for high-speed UEs, it would be a waste of radio resources to
collect UE information from all the users in a cell. For that
purpose, the new mechanism could support a customizable set
of filters to ensure only the needed RAN data are collected.
Apart from the data type, a filter may specify the associated
service type (e.g., throughput with a specific 5QI), area of
interest, time range (e.g., day-time) or UE status (e.g., not
to collect data from low-battery UEs). Such a filter may also
specify a criterion consisting of math symbols (e.g., greater
than “>”) and threshold values, e.g., “when UE velocity > 250
km/h”. The logical expression is evaluated at the data source,
with which only the subset of the RAN data that satisfies the
criterion is delivered to the data collector. Fig. 5 illustrates
the typical examples of a task-driven customizable RAN data
collection mechanism.
Fig. 5: Task-driven customizable RAN data collection mech-
anism.
Standardization Consideration: The impact of data col-
lection on 6G RAN standardization is twofold. One aspect
is the generic protocols on relevant interfaces including the
air interface (i.e., Uu), the RAN interfaces (e.g., Xn/F1/E1
interfaces in 5G), and the interfaces with OAM and core
network. The design of such protocols shall not only ensure
efficiency for diverse data collection tasks, but also MNO’s
observability and controllability. The other aspect is the de-
tailed specifications of AI/ML related data types and formats
(including the input/output data for model inference, training
7
Fig. 6: Enhanced AI/ML model management for 6G RAN.
data, etc.), and the associated configurations for the data
collection tasks. Such specifications will be consistently built
on top of the aforementioned generic protocols and driven
by specific scenarios and use cases. Beyond data collection,
aspects including data pre-processing, storage and retrieval
need more attention in the standards, which may require a
more comprehensive data management framework [29].
C. Controllable and Highly Reliable AI Model Management
As AI becomes integral to 6G RAN control and opti-
mization, robust and controllable AI model management is
critical due to the probabilistic nature of AI, which complicates
predictability in dynamic environments. While 3GPP has laid
the groundwork for AI/ML management in 5G, covering
data collection, training, inference, and monitoring, current
frameworks fall short for commercial deployment, lacking
operational drift detection, pre-deployment validation, and
model continuous learning to adapt to changing conditions. In
addition, emerging techniques like federated learning and large
foundation models offer improved accuracy and adaptability.
To enable AI-Native 6G RAN, advancements for model man-
agement are expected. Fig. 6 illustrates an enhanced functional
model management framework in 6G, building upon the 5G
AI/ML framework.
Enhanced Model Performance Monitoring: Once de-
ployed in the RAN, AI models must be continuously mon-
itored and tuned to ensure their stability and reliability.
While 3GPP has initiated preliminary studies on AI model
performance monitoring in 5G/5G-A, focusing on inference
accuracy, system KPIs, and data distribution [5], AI-Native
RAN requires a three-dimensional framework encompassing
AI model performance, network performance, and resource
utilization. Silent degradation from data drift, unanticipated
scenarios, or traffic variations necessitates end-to-end moni-
toring that integrates model accuracy metrics with network
KPIs (e.g., latency, throughput) to assess real-world impact.
Resource indicators (inference delay, memory consumption,
energy efficiency) are also critical for operational feasibility
and cost evaluation, forming a foundation for standardized
monitoring frameworks. Representative indicators are illus-
trated in Table II, which provides a foundation for standard-
ized and scalable monitoring frameworks. These metrics are
expected to be collected from diverse AI inference nodes and
interfaces across RAN.
Model Continuous Operation: Model continuous opera-
tion is essential for ensuring robust and adaptive AI behav-
ior in AI-native RAN, particularly under dynamic network
conditions and user mobility. As UEs move across cells,
consistent inference must be maintained through synchro-
nization of model context (e.g., model ID, version) across
gNBs, supported by standardized Xn or OAM-gNB interfaces.
To adapt to changing environments, the network may adopt
performance-triggered retraining, where model degradation
detected by the gNB or UE initiates data collection, retraining,
validation, and inference emulation before redeployment, or
periodic retraining, which proactively updates models at regu-
lar intervals using refreshed datasets. Both approaches require
meticulous model version control and dataset traceability to
ensure consistency between training and inference. To further
enhance robustness, RAN Digital Twins (DTs) can provide
synergetic data and support model validation by simulating
real-world scenarios, enabling pre-deployment testing, syn-
thetic data generation, and closed-loop optimization. This inte-
grated framework supports safer, more reliable AI deployment
and sustainable model evolution in future 6G networks.
Advanced AI/ML Technology Support: Federated learn-
8
TABLE II: Examples of the ML performance monitoring metrics.
Dimension
Example Metrics
Model Performance
Accuracy, precision, recall, MAE, MSE, RMSE, etc.
Generalization ability, e.g., Adversarial attack success rate
Calculation efficiency, e.g., Inference latency
Output error distribution/residual distribution
Network Performance
Network energy saving: Energy consumption/efficiency, packet loss rate, user data rate etc.
Mobility management: Handover failure, radio link failure, delay, packet loss rate etc.
CSI compression: BLER, average user throughput (UPT), 5%-UPT etc.
Resource Performance
Computational load, e.g. CPU/GPU utilization
Storage overhead, e.g., Data storage/cache occupancy
UE and RAN energy usage status
ing (FL) enhances AI model generalization in 6G RAN
by enabling privacy-preserving collaborative training across
distributed gNBs. Each node trains a local model on its
own data, while updates are aggregated—either through peer
coordination or centralized RAN nodes—to form a global
model that reflects diverse network conditions, such as varying
traffic loads and mobility patterns. Effective deployment of FL
in RAN requires architectural support for adaptive participant
selection to prioritize nodes with high-value data, mecha-
nisms to handle device and data heterogeneity for stable and
timely convergence, and efficient update aggregation. These
considerations are essential to realize scalable and robust FL
workflows in AI-native RAN environments. Large foundation
models offer a unified approach to modeling complex radio
dynamics in 6G RAN, enabling tasks like channel prediction
and beam selection with strong generalization across diversi-
fied environments. To enable it, efficient distributed adaptation,
model compression for low-latency inference, and task-aware
monitoring need to be considered so as to ensure performance
in resource-limited settings.
Standardization Consideration: To ensure the stability and
reliability of AI models in 6G RAN, it is essential to define the
collection of multi-dimensional performance monitoring met-
rics through interfaces such as Uu, Xn, and those associated
with network management. Based on the monitored perfor-
mance, standardized procedures and interfaces are required to
enable the exchange of model management instructions, such
as triggering model retraining, updating model versions, or
reverting to non-AI baselines, among UEs, RAN nodes, and
OAM systems. Building on this foundation, end-to-end model
lifecycle management must be supported through interoperable
and standardized workflows, covering retraining, validation,
and deployment. In addition, mechanisms for model and
dataset ID traceability, version control, and lifecycle metadata
management should be specified to ensure consistent and
reliable AI behavior across multi-vendor deployments. To
future-proof the architecture, an extensible framework is also
needed to accommodate emerging AI/ML technologies, such
as federated learning (FL), and to support their seamless
integration into the 6G RAN ecosystem.
D. Distributed Collaborative AI computing
The integration of AI into 6G RAN promises to revolu-
tionize network optimization and service delivery. However,
widespread deployment is limited by constrained computa-
tional resources, energy budgets, and fragmented, localized
data at individual nodes. These factors hinder the training
and execution of robust AI models, underscoring the need
for a distributed, collaborative computing paradigm across the
RAN. To overcome these challenges, centralized AI computing
RAN nodes and coordination functions can be introduced to
enable AI resource pooling and orchestrate workloads across
multiple gNBs and UEs. Effective collaborative AI mech-
anisms must be developed to optimize resource utilization
and unify intelligence across heterogeneous network elements,
including gNBs, UEs, and centralized AI nodes. Three funda-
mental collaborative modes are then envisioned: collaborative
training, inference, and fine-tuning, as shown in Fig. 7.
Collaborative Training: gNBs or a dedicated centralized
AI computing RAN node can collaboratively train global or
personalized AI models using distributed datasets, typically via
federated or split learning paradigms. This approach mitigates
data sparsity and heterogeneity at individual nodes while
preserving user data privacy and reducing communication
overhead. For instance, in a federated learning scenario for
user mobility prediction, each gNB collects localized mobility
data (e.g., handover logs, signal strength traces) and trains a
local model on-site. The centralized AI computing RAN node
aggregates these updates to refine a global mobility model,
which is then redistributed to gNBs for subsequent training
rounds. This iterative training loop ensures improved model
generalization across the network.
Collaborative Inference: Inference workloads can be flex-
ibly partitioned between gNBs and centralized AI computing
nodes to optimize performance under resource constraints.
While capable gNBs and UEs can handle lightweight inference
tasks locally, resource-limited gNBs can directly request infer-
ence from the centralized node. Leveraging aggregated data or
intermediate inferences from multiple sites, the centralized AI
computing node applies more advanced algorithms to generate
globally optimized strategies, such as interference mitigation
and dynamic resource allocation, which are then distributed to
gNBs for coordinated execution. This collaborative paradigm
enhances adaptability, efficiency, and overall network intelli-
gence in real time.
Collaborative Pre-Train and Fine-Tuning: Pre-trained
global models are fine-tuned at edge nodes using localized
data, allowing adaptation to specific conditions while con-
tributing updates to the shared global model. For instance, a
central node distributes a general traffic classification model,
which gNBs then fine-tune based on local traffic patterns to
enhance scheduling and QoS enforcement. UEs also adapt
9
Centralized AI Computing RAN node
 
② Global 
model 
delivery
④ Client 
model 
upload
③ Model training
⑤ Model 
aggregation
① Client 
selection
…
Collaborative training
Collaborative inference
Collaborative fine-tuning
① Model 
inference 
request
③ Model 
inference 
result 
response
① Model 
inference request
③ Model inference 
result response
Centralized AI Computing RAN node
 
⑤Foundation 
model adjustment
① Foundation 
model pre-training
④ Fine-tuning 
parameters 
report
③ Scene-based model fine-tuning
② Foundation 
model delivery
Centralized AI Computing RAN node
 
② Model inference
② Model 
inference
Fig. 7: Three types of collaborative AI computing in AI-Native RAN.
QoE models with personalized feedback, enabling real-time
optimizations like video bitrate adjustment. Fine-tuned updates
are selectively sent back to improve the global model.
To support this distributed paradigm, mechanisms such as
efficient resource pooling and dynamic scheduling are essen-
tial. gNBs and UEs can register compute capabilities with cen-
tralized RAN nodes, which form logical compute pools based
on geography, hardware type, or service needs. These pools
abstract heterogeneity and support the scalable deployment
of AI workloads. Intelligent scheduling dynamically allocates
resources like CPUs/GPUs based on task priority, QoS, and
energy efficiency, ensuring optimal utilization across the RAN.
Standardization Consideration: Enabling collaborative AI
computing in the RAN requires architectural definitions of
distributed intelligence functions across gNBs and centralized
AI computing nodes. This includes standardized procedures
and interfaces to support collaborative training, inference,
and model adaptation. A dedicated AI computing resource
management and orchestration framework is also essential,
covering functions like resource discovery, usage monitoring,
and topology management. To ensure efficient coordination,
interfaces between the management system and the RAN
computing infrastructure must enable real-time computing
resource reporting, AI workload scaling and migration, and
seamless integration with existing RAN management systems
across heterogeneous network nodes.
E. AIaaS provisioning
AIaaS is widely recognized as one of the key defining
features of future 6G systems. Under this paradigm, network
operators are expected to evolve from mere connectivity
providers to edge AI computing providers, and ultimately to
edge AI service enablers. Specifically, AI-Native RAN plays a
pivotal role in facilitating this evolution, enabling three modes
of service delivery that are specifically tailored to meet the
needs of AI applications, depicted in Fig. 8.
• Connection assurance for AI services refers to the RAN’s
ability to deliver reliable, adaptive transmission tailored
to the unique demands of AI workloads, requiring evo-
lution beyond traditional network capabilities. Three key
directions are essential: (1) enhancing the QoS framework
to handle complex, opaque data flows like multimodal
inputs and model updates; (2) supporting novel traffic
patterns, such as lateral flows in embodied intelligence
and uplink-heavy, bursty traffic in personal assistants; and
(3) ensuring deterministic latency—e.g., under 200ms for
assistants and below 100ms for embodied AI—potentially
[30] through selective preemption of background traffic.
• Data services enable AI applications to adapt in real time
for user experience by exposing internal network metrics
(e.g., traffic load, link quality) and sensing data (e.g.,
mobility patterns, location). For example, personal assis-
tant apps can adjust video compression rates for uplink
transmission to reduce latency, while robotic systems may
tune sensing and update frequencies to avoid packet loss.
To support this, the RAN must also offer capabilities such
as data prediction, augmentation, and cleansing to ensure
timely and accurate data exposure.
• RAN AI computing services support external edge AI
applications by exposing heterogeneous computing re-
sources, such as GPUs and NPUs, within the RAN,
while also meeting the internal demands of RAN in-
telligence. This dual use demands efficient scheduling,
parallel processing, and tight coordination between com-
munication and computing to ensure performance and
user experience. For example, Ref. [31] proposes a radio
channel adaptive communication-computing joint opti-
mization (RCACCJO) algorithm that dynamically selects
model partition and early-exit points while allocating
compute and uplink resources based on real-time channel
states. Simulations show a 0.4% accuracy gain over non-
coordinated baselines like uniform bandwidth allocation.
Standardization Consideration: To fully unlock the com-
mercial potential of RAN’s connection capabilities, data assets,
and infrastructure, it is essential to standardize QoS assurance
mechanisms for AI, RAN data exposure, and the framework
for provisioning low-latency AI computing services. Enabling
RAN AIaaS requires an open API framework that facilitates
seamless access to RAN resources. Through standardized
APIs, operators can lower deployment costs, enhance oper-
ational efficiency, and deliver modular AI functions as on-
demand services. Moreover, open APIs promote a collabora-
tive ecosystem by enabling integration of third-party AI capa-
bilities, thereby accelerating the evolution toward intelligent
and flexible networks.
10
Computing 
Capabilities Exposure
 
 
 
 
Models, Data and
Information 
exposure
AI App (OTT)
AI App (UE)
300 ms 
E2E latency
AI App (OTT)
AI App (UE)
RAN
compressed 
transmission 
AI App (OTT)
AI App (UE)
RAN
 
requirement
Computing
Requirements
SLA
s
300 ms 
E2E latency
Task Offloading
(a) Connection assurance for AI applications
(b) Data services
 
 
 
 
 
(c) RAN AI computing services
QoS
Assurance
RAN
User Plane
Control Plane
Information 
Exposure
RAN QoS Profile
Information 
exposure
network
data
sensing 
data
AI LCM & Resource Allocation 
Fig. 8: Three AI application-oriented service modes enabled by AI-Native RAN. (a) connection assurance for AI applications;
(b) data services; (c) RAN AI computing services.
IV. AI-NATIVE RAN STANDARDIZATION FOR 6G
In this section, the holistic vision for AI-Native RAN
standardization in 6G will be presented with the emphasis on
the Day 1 work, including the overall considerations, the key
designs, and the collaboration between 3GPP and other SDOs.
A. Overall considerations for 6G AI-Native RAN
1) The scope of 6G’s Day 1 standards will determine
the efficacy of AI-Native RAN: The first release in each
generation of 3GPP standards determines, to a tremendous
extent, the practical capabilities of the commercial network
of that generation. While the evolution of 3GPP standards
typically takes 1.5 to 2 years per release, the operators
upgrade their networks far less frequently due to the high
total cost of ownership (TCO). In the 4G/5G era, the first
release (i.e., Release 8 and Release 15, respectively) was the
choice for large-scale deployment by the major operators, and
accordingly gained the most R&D support from the whole
industrial chain. As a comparison, despite the numerous new
features added in the subsequent releases in 4G/5G, only a few
of them have been supported by the RAN and UE vendors,
and even fewer purchased by operators. The same situation is
likely to occur in 6G as well, leading to low utilization of the
functionalities that arrive late.
One such example is the high-speed railway (HST) en-
hancement. China has an HST network which spans 48,000
kilometers as of 2024 and operates at a speed of up to 350
km/h. The radio signal in such environments suffers from a
severe Doppler frequency shift. The passenger’s experience
with the UE deteriorated significantly, due to the insufficient
detection and compensation capabilities for Doppler frequency
shift in the 4G and early 5G UEs as well as base stations. The
related enhancements were introduced only in Release 16 and
thereafter, making them less available in the live network.
2) Forward compatibility is essential for the standard-
ization of AI-Native RAN: While backward compatibility
is a must for virtually all the telecom standards, forward
compatibility is of special significance for the standardization
of AI-Native RAN. Such forward compatibility will have an
impact on both hardware and software.
From the hardware perspective, voices from many major
operators have indicated serious concerns about 6G on the
increasingly complex hardware, along with cautiousness on
the potential 6G deployment. To mitigate the concerns, the
standardization of AI-Native RAN must strive for hardware
reusability. When a later release of standards is available, the
hardware installed for the first release should be fully utilized
to host the upgraded software functions. Meanwhile, the
6G AI-Native RAN architecture and interfaces shall support
centralized resource management and distributed collaborative
processing for AI/ML tasks. This paradigm will not only re-
duce the average investment per RAN site by resource pooling,
but also maximize the utilization of earlier investments by
aggregating the distributed AI computing resources to support
AI/ML functionalities introduced in later releases.
From the software perspective, the forward compatibility
for the AI/ML models may require additional considerations
beyond the traditional forward compatibility in 5G protocol
designs. Due to the lack of theoretical explainability, a com-
plex AI/ML model (e.g., DNN) may not be capable of superior
performance in all conditions, and hence the RAN nodes
may need to replace it with an updated version that can be
of a different model structure or retrained with new AI/ML
data. To that end, the 6G RAN standards shall be sufficiently
flexible to enable forward compatibility for the AI/ML models.
Besides, it is envisioned that AI/ML models may evolve from
replacing a single processing to replacing multiple processing
blocks, and eventually replacing a major part of a transceiver
[10]. To enable such a dynamic application of AI/ML models,
clear interface definitions are essential between the processing
blocks as well as the protocol layers.
3) To unlock the full commercial potential of AI invest-
ments, standards should enable RAN AI service exposure:
Different from traditional RAN functions and equipment, AI
computing tends to be more expensive and energy-consuming,
and therefore, its business opportunities shall be fully ex-
ploited. On one hand, AI for RAN is highly promising in au-
11
tomating and optimizing the networks. The improved network
efficiency will naturally be the first source of commercial value
from AI. For that reason, the standardization process should be
strict in the identification of killer use cases for the operators,
accompanied by realistic and meaningful validations to justify
the gains. On the other hand, new business opportunities may
exist from a resource utilization perspective. Note that AI
model training is compute-intensive, but is not likely to be
performed for RAN all the time. It is therefore desirable to
enhance the utilization of the temporally and geographically
distributed idle AI computing capacity. One approach could
be similar to the cloud computing paradigm, where the RAN
offers its idle AI computing capacity to AI service applica-
tions, which would create a new source of commercial value
for operators beyond connectivity. For that reason, the 6G
standards should also enable the operators to expose their
RAN-side AI capabilities to AI service applications in an open
ecosystem.
4) 3GPP shall specify the core standards for 6G AI-
Native RAN, but the success also hinges on collaboration
across SDOs: The complexity of 6G RAN standards will
go beyond the traditional RAN domain. The confluence with
AI/ML and cloud technologies will have impacts not only
on functional architecture and interfaces, but also on the
implementations that are beyond 3GPP’s scope. To guarantee
the on-time and high-quality delivery of the standards, we
need the collaboration of all stakeholders. For example, ETSI
has defined network functions virtualization (NFV) and multi-
access edge computing (MEC), and the O-RAN Alliance has
been dedicated to RAN cloud as well as the RAN Cloud
management and orchestration.
It remains imperative for 3GPP RAN to take the over-
arching leadership, in terms of specifying the overall func-
tional architecture for 6G RAN and ensuring the essential
interoperability (especially with the core network and UE).
Meanwhile, the technical realization of 6G RAN nodes should
fully consider reusing and introducing the open standards from
specialized domains as well as the de-facto standards for
hardware/software implementations. Towards the AI-Native
6G RAN, the SDOs need to synchronize their timeline and
align their division of work properly to ensure a single and
consistent set of standards.
B. Key designs of AI-Native RAN for 6G Day 1
The actual standardization of 6G AI-Native RAN will
involve the use cases, the architecture, and the elementary
building blocks. The whole process for AI-Native RAN stan-
dardization will follow the use case driven approach, starting
with a careful identification of key use cases among those in
Section III.A. The proposed functional architecture and the
essential building blocks for 6G Day 1 are as follows.
1) Functional architecture: The proposed AI-Native RAN
architecture is illustrated in Fig. 9. The key component of
the proposed architecture is a novel AI/ML-oriented RAN
node, termed as “AI Node”. The AI Node and the 6G BS
(“6gNB”), with a one-to-many cardinality and interconnected
by a new RAN interface, constitute the 6G RAN together.
The non-real-time management aspects are supported by the
RAN OAM in the central cloud, which has not only its own
AI/ML capabilities (e.g., management data analytics (MDA)
for 6G) but also enables the MNOs with overall supervision
and coordination for the AI/ML functions distributed in the
RAN Nodes.
The AI Node is equipped with sufficient AI/ML computing
resources (e.g., those on an edge platform) and typically
deployed as a locally centralized node. It hosts the following
functionalities:
• Data collection: it can collect data from RAN, UE and
other domains for various AI/ML tasks including AI/ML
model training, inference and performance monitoring. It
may also store RAN data for future AI/ML training on
demand.
• Model management: it can perform local manage-
ment and control for the AI/ML models used for the
L3 use cases, e.g., model deployment, model activa-
tion/deactivation, and switching among multiple appli-
cable models. Moreover, it has the potential as the FL
server that coordinates the distributed 6gNBs in the, if
the 6gNBs are mounted with adequate AI/ML training
capabilities.
• Model repository: it can store and catalog the AI/ML
models for RAN and UE, which may be deployed at L1,
L2 or L3. It may also serve as a model repository for AI
service applications.
• AI/ML training: it supports AI/ML model training for
RAN and UE, regardless of L1, L2 or L3 use cases. The
pooled AI/ML computing resource also enables the AI
Node with support for training large models for the 6G
RAN. Moreover, the efficacy of model training is boosted
by the digital twin capabilities in the AI Node.
• AI/ML inference: it can perform AI/ML model inference
for the L3 use cases in RAN. The large models for RAN
can be employed for the complex use cases as well.
In addition, it may perform the AI/ML inference tasks
offloaded from the 6gNBs in the collaborative inference
scenarios.
• RAN capability exposure: it is capable of exposing spare
computing capacities (AI and non-AI), specific RAN data
(e.g., RAN analytics), and AI/ML programmability to
authorized consumers. The computing service can be
consumed by OTT service applications that are deployed
locally (not shown in Fig. 9). The RAN data service may
be consumed by the core network via a new service-
based interface (SBI), or by OAM via the management
interfaces. The AI/ML programmability can be exposed
via open APIs to RAN applications that are hosted on
the AI Node, which can customize the AI/ML models
and associated workflow for specific use cases.
The 6gNB is the distributed RAN node for UE’s radio
access. In addition to the basic communication functionalities
(e.g., dynamic scheduling), it also hosts AI/ML LCM and
AI/ML inference for L1/L2 use cases, as well as the associated
data collection functionalities. Such an AI/ML functional split
with AI/ML node ensures the real-time operations in L1/L2.
12
AI Node
6gNB
Mgmt. I/F
RAN OAM
6gNB
Model mgmt.
Communication
Model mgmt.
Model training
Model inference
to 6G AMF / UPF
UE
Communication
Uu I/F
Data collection
Model storage
6G Xn I/F
New RAN I/F
Model inference
Data collection
Model inference 
UE
Communication
Data collection
Model inference
Data collection
RAN capability 
exposure
New SBI
RAN App
RAN App
RAN App APIs
AI/ML 
management
6G NG I/F
to 6G 
AMF/UPF
Consumed by 
6G Core NFs, 
etc.
Model mgmt.
Communication
Model inference
Data collection
Uu I/F
OAM AI/ML functionalities
Fig. 9: The proposed 6G AI-Native RAN architecture.
This design also minimizes the AI/ML computing requirement
on the 6gNBs, as the most compute-intensive AI/ML model
training tasks are centralized to the AI Node.
Some 6G UEs will also be capable of AI/ML functionalities
for RAN. Nevertheless, due to its battery and form factor, such
6G UEs are likely to support AI/ML inference and associated
data collection only, apart from the basic communication
functionalities.
The overall RAN architecture lays the foundation for an
AI-Native RAN in 6G with the following key features:
• Efficient utilization of AI computing resource: By
offloading the sporadic AI/ML training tasks from the
6gNBs and UEs to the centralized AI Node, statistical
multiplexing can be achieved. Moreover, the AI Node can
offer AI/ML inference service for the 5G/6G BS without
AI computing capabilities, which is especially attractive
for low-cost roll-out in the developing countries. Besides,
the AI computing resource may be shared with local
AI service applications, and hence further enhancing the
resource utilization.
• Hierarchical AI/ML collaboration: The proposed de-
sign assigns the AI/ML functionalities in a systematic
approach, based on the nature of diverse AI/ML tasks
in RAN and their timeliness requirements. The cross-
domain AI/ML collaborations with OAM or core network
are enabled as well. The design also facilitates advanced
learning framework like federated learning, for example,
among BS and multiple UEs, or among the OAM and
multiple AI Nodes.
• Programmable AI/ML workflow: The light-weighted
RAN applications enable high programmability for the
AI-Native RAN, allowing operators to customize and
optimize AI/ML functionalities based on specific use
cases and deployment scenarios. This paradigm ensures
the 6G RAN to adapt to diversified requirements (e.g.,
the verticals) in an agile manner compared with the
traditional device-oriented R&D process.
2) Building blocks for AI-Native RAN on 6G Day 1:
Based on the general considerations and the proposed RAN
architecture, several items should be standardized with detailed
technical realizations (aka “stage 3” in 3GPP and many other
SDOs) for 6G Day 1, described as follows and summarized
in Table III:
• Data collection: Native design for data collection is the
initial step toward AI-Native RAN in 6G. The new data
collection mechanisms should be introduced first for the
air interface, and then on the cross-domain interfaces on
6G Day 1, as discussed in Section III-B. Such mech-
anisms involve mainly the protocols and procedures to
configure data collection tasks, and how the data packets
are delivered among the entities, with considerations for
UE state, mobility, and coordination on basic connectivity
services. The fine-grained data collection mechanisms
that can be customized to diversified data collection tasks,
13
should be continuously improved in the life cycle of 6G
RAN.
• Model management: It is well recognized that model
management in 6G RAN should evolve toward an in-
network and continuous AI/ML workflow, and accord-
ingly, the model management procedures that considers
the model’s training and pre-validation phase before
deployment and update in its life cycle, are dispens-
able in the Day 1 standards. Such procedures may
involve capability discovery, task configuration, activa-
tion/deactivation, and status reporting, etc. Meanwhile, a
more systematic set of performance monitoring designs is
essential on 6G Day 1, including the specifications of the
performance metric types that are applicable for the mul-
tiple collaborating models across different nodes/layers
as well as the individual models. To facilitate RAN’s
evolution with cutting-edge AI technologies, the Day 1
standards should offer the scalability and flexibility for
advanced techniques, such as FL and large foundation
models.
• Collaborative AI computing: The basic protocol support
for the collaboration among the AI Node and the 6gNB
should be in place on Day 1, to make the best of the
proposed RAN architecture in terms of AI computing
resource utilization. Such basic support would relate to
the interactions between the AI Node and the 6gNB for
collaborative model training and inference. The manage-
ment and orchestration of the AI computing resources are
also essential for enabling infrastructure reusability and
ensuring forward compatibility. This requires the aware-
ness, virtualization, monitoring, and optimized scheduling
of the RAN AI infrastructure. In a later phase, more
collaborative patterns, e.g., collaborative pre-training and
fine-tuning, can be introduced as more AI computing
capabilities are mounted in the 6gNBs.
• AI service assurance: It is crucial for the 6G AI-
Native RAN to deliver unparalleled connectivity for
the emerging mobile AI services, and therefore, novel
mechanisms for QoS assurance shall be available on
6G Day 1. To meet the new service requirements, the
new mechanisms may involve real-time acquisition of AI
service traffic characteristics and dynamic adaptation in
RAN, in addition to the QoS framework enhancements
that consider new service KPIs beyond the traditional
ones, such as throughput, delay and packet loss. When the
6G RAN evolves with new computing services beyond
connectivity, the joint optimization of radio and comput-
ing resources should be considered to ensure the user
experience.
• RAN data service: First, a unified service exposure
framework is essential on Day 1 for RAN to expose its
data services to the external consumers. The framework
should enable service discovery, access control and mon-
itoring, charging, etc. The detailed design for the service
framework could be easier to start from the existing
Common API Framework (CAPIF) in 3GPP [32], but
also needs to address the characteristics in RAN like
distributed deployment and UE anonymity. On top of
RAN Management and Orchestration
AI Node
6gNB
Mgmt. I/F
RAN OAM
6g Xn
New RAN I/F
New SBI
Functions and 
interfaces defined 
by 3GPP RAN
Functions and 
interfaces defined
by other SDOs
RAN App
RAN App
RAN App APIs
Radio Cloud Platform
Orchestration I/F
6gNB
Uu I/F
Uu I/F
6G NG I/F
6G NG I/F
Orchestration
Fig. 10: Potential split of work between 3GPP and O-RAN,
ETSI, etc.
the service exposure framework, a number of RAN data
services could come at 6G Day 1, and followed by
enhanced capabilities like data augmentation at a later
phase.
• RAN AI computing service: The same service exposure
framework for RAN data services should be reused to
expose its AI computing services. With the unified service
exposure framework, it is expected that the AI computing
services can be available on 6G Day 1 for both OTT
service providers and RAN applications. When such
services are consumed by OTT service providers, support
for local offloading of the service traffic is essential in the
standards. When the services are consumed by the RAN
applications, standardized APIs should be exposed to
enable the RAN applications to influence RAN behavior.
As 6G RAN evolves, more advanced AI computing
services may be considered, e.g., using RAN data (e.g.,
sensing data) to optimize/specialize AI models for OTT
services.
C. Collaborations among 3GPP, ITU and other SDOs
A clean split of work among 3GPP, ITU and other SDOs is
crucial for the multi-SDO collaborations to fully achieve the
AI-Native RAN vision.
As the link between global governments and the telecom
industry, ITU has a visionary role in setting the objectives of
the next-generation network. Moreover, it should take the lead-
ership in delineating the globally-unified, umbrella framework
and terminologies for AI Native networks. A relevant activity
is the new Focus Group on AI-Native for Telecommunication
Networks (FG-AINN) established in 2024, which aims to
specify the terminologies, identify new AI/ML use cases
and standardization impacts, and reshape the next-generation
network architecture with native AI/ML designs [33].
14
TABLE III: Building blocks for AI Native RAN on 6G Day 1, and further enhancements for evolution
Essential capabilities
Standardization impact
Building blocks for 6G Day 1
Further enhancements
for evolution
AI-driven RAN
Processing, Optimization,
and Automation
AI for RAN use cases
- 5G-A AI-enabled use cases;
- 6G new uses (e.g., AI-based RS overhead reduction),
considering complexity and performance gains
Cross-domain use cases
Data collection
- Dedicated AI radio bearer on air interface;
- Cross-domain data collection
Task-driven customizable
RAN data collection
Model management
In network and continuous AI/ML workflow
that enables forward compatibility
- model training/retraining, inference;
- model validation, model deployment and update;
- model performance monitoring;
- capability discovery, task configuration,
model activation/deactivation, and status reporting
Advanced AI/ML
technology support
Efficient, controllable and
highly reliable AI LCM
Collaborative AI
computing
- Collaborative training and Collaborative inference;
(for efficient AI computing resource utilization
and improved performance);
- AI computing resource management and orchestration
(to enable RAN infrastructure sharing, reusability,
and forward compatibility)
Collaborative pre-training
and fine-tuning
AI service assurance
- Connection QoS assurance
Assurance for integrated
communication and
computing services
RAN data service
- RAN service exposure framework;
- RAN data exposure services
RAN data augmentation
AIaaS provisioning
RAN AI computing
service
- RAN service exposure framework (same as above);
- RAN AI computing services
Advanced AI computing
services
3GPP, as the most important SDO for the telecom industry,
should be responsible for the end-to-end 6G architecture,
protocols, and interfaces, ensuring interoperability, scalability,
and backward compatibility in commercial networks. It col-
laborates with industry stakeholders, regulators, and academia
to address emerging 6G requirements including the integration
with AI/ML, from ITU and other sources. In particular, 3GPP
shall ensure multi-vendor interoperability in RAN among the
base stations, and with the core network as well as the UEs.
As NFV and cloud-native paradigm begin to change how the
RAN devices are implemented, other SDOs including ETSI
and O-RAN Alliance may play a critical role in the RAN
cloud infrastructure that host the RAN functions, which is in-
strumental for the forward compatibility in terms of hardware.
Moreover, the SDOs other than 3GPP may also complement
the RAN architecture with cutting-edge innovations, on the
premise that the enhancements are compliant with the 3GPP
standards, and that the work is open and non-discriminative.
Under the umbrella framework set by ITU, different options
for the split of work between 3GPP and other SDOs can be
considered for the standardization of 6G AI Native RAN. A
recommended option is illustrated in Fig. 10. In this option,
3GPP is responsible for the 6G RAN nodes (6gNB and the
new AI Node) and their management aspects, as well as
the core network and the UE. The interfaces associated with
those functions are also within the 3GPP scope. Apart from
the hierarchical architecture associated with the AI Node, a
consistent set of AI/ML LCM mechanisms shall be specified in
3GPP, which will impact all the interfaces and their protocols,
in particular, the air interface and the new interface between
AI Node and 6gNBs. As complement to 3GPP RAN, the RAN
applications hosted by the AI Node, and the associated APIs,
may benefit from the expertise in O-RAN Alliance and may
continue their journey outside 3GPP. Such RAN applications
can also have their variants in RAN OAM, to enable flexibility
and innovation in the management domain. This paradigm
has been proved valuable in 5G O-RAN with its featured
hierarchy of Non-RT and Near-RT RICs. ETSI and O-RAN
will also contribute to the implementation of cloud-native
RAN. The RAN cloud infrastructure and its interface towards
the integrated management and orchestration system will fall
in scope for the SDOs other than 3GPP. It is anticipated that
an open and coherent ecosystem will prosper in 6G with its
promise for new services and verticals.
An alternative option can also be considered. In this option,
the AI Node, along with the hosted RAN applications, is out
of scope for 3GPP but specified in O-RAN. The interfaces
and protocols associated with the AI Node are also part of
O-RAN’s work. Apart from that, 3GPP is still responsible
for the 6gNBs and their management aspects, as well as the
core network and the UE. As 3GPP RAN will define the
AI/ML LCM for the 6gNBs, it may be in the best interests
of the telecom industry for O-RAN to align its LCM designs
with those in 3GPP RAN. The collaboration among SDOs is
expected to catalyze innovation in AI-native 6G RAN.
15
Fig. 11: Three phases nationwide large scale field trial.
V. NATIONWIDE LARGE SCALE FIELD TRIALS
A. Overview
In this section, we will share the exploration and field trial
practices on the typical use cases and key features of the AI-
Native RAN architecture from China Mobile’s perspective.
To empirically validate the technical feasibility, architecture
features and commercial viability of AI-Native RAN envi-
sioned for 6G, a nationwide large-scale field trial is planned
across three iterative phases as illustrated in Fig. 11. Built upon
the nationwide 5G-A commercial network, this trial aims to
systematically evaluate key features advancing the 6G vision,
including the scalability of the proposed hierarchical AI-Native
RAN architecture, the potential of experience-centric service
models, and the convergence of communication and edge
intelligence.
Phase 1 focused on the core architecture feature valida-
tion, i.e., the centralized and distributed AI coordination, and
three typical use cases, including the AI-enabled differentiated
service quality assurance, network energy saving, and root
cause analysis for poor user experience. A centralized AI
computing unit (CCU) is introduced and deployed in the trial
for the computationally intensive AI inferences in the proposed
solution, which reflects the AI node component as proposed
in the 6G RAN architecture. Phase 1 tests started from Jan.
2024 to Dec. 2024 and covers the 31 cities in China with 5000
5G-A base stations.
Building upon Phase 1, Phase 2 extends testing to 475,000
gNBs and incorporates diverse deployment scenarios, includ-
ing high-density urban environments such as stadiums, con-
cert venues, and tourist hotspots. This phase introduces AI-
driven radio resource management (RRM) techniques, such as
intelligent resource scheduling and multi-cell coordination, to
enhance network performance and SLA assurance capabilities.
Additionally, Phase 2 explores AI-based user profiling and
proactive service subscription recommendations to monetize
“experience-centric” service models. For instance, users run-
ning extended reality (XR) applications in congested urban
environments may be prompted to subscribe to an “Ultra-
Low Latency” assurance plan, which offers dynamic and deter-
ministic service guarantees that outperform those available to
non-subscribed users. These advancements also validate the
synergistic coordination of the RAN, network management
systems (NMS), and business support systems (BSS).
Phase 3 targets nationwide deployment and addresses
emerging scenarios, such as AI-driven unmanned aerial vehicle
(UAV) mobility management and QoE assurance for embodied
intelligence systems. Architecturally, this phase will further
investigate RAN capability exposure and the feasibility of edge
AI service provisioning leveraging RAN infrastructure. Phase
3 represents a pioneering step toward realizing the 6G AIaaS
vision, positioning AI-Native RAN as foundational enablers
of next-generation intelligent ecosystems.
In the following, the deployment architecture for the trials
and three typical case studies in Phase 1 will be elaborated in
detail.
B. Deployment Architecture
The newly introduced AI-driven processes are computation-
ally intensive, imposing demands that exceed the capabilities
of existing gNBs. To resolve this limitation, a CCU—aligned
with the AI node component proposed in 6G RAN architec-
tures—was deployed in the trial. This unit consolidates com-
putational resources to execute resource-intensive AI inference
tasks across a cluster of gNBs, effectively serving as a shared
AI hub. The CCU supports centralized model training, real-
time inference, and cross-gNB coordination within its serviced
gNB cluster. This architecture facilitates centralized and dis-
tributed AI coordination as well as elastic resource scaling,
which significantly improves RAN computing infrastructure
efficiency and enables dynamic resource sharing. Notably, the
16
Fig. 12: The deployment architecture, topology and networking of the testing
computing capability of the CCU can be flexibly scaled out
to accommodate growing AI workloads. Furthermore, surplus
computing capacity within the CCU can be repurposed to
host edge AI applications (e.g., distributed video analytics),
leveraging RAN infrastructure to deliver low-latency edge AI
services in a cost-effective manner.
To validate the potential of AI-enabled RAN optimization,
China Mobile led a large-scale field trial in 2024 with three
typical use cases, shown as the Phase 1 program in Fig. 11.
The deployment architecture, topology and networking of the
testing in the field trial are illustrated in Fig. 12.
C. Case Study 1: AI-enabled differentiated service assurance
In this subsection, we present a case study on AI-enabled
differentiated service assurance. The case study also validates
the superiority of the centralized AI computing unit in enabling
an AI-Native RAN architecture.
To achieve deterministic service assurance for critical ap-
plications, such as those prioritized for VIP customers, an
AI-empowered solution was designed. The solution employs
AI-based real-time service perception to dynamically classify
traffic and enforce service-level guarantees based on operator-
defined policies. For example, to ensure uninterrupted short-
video streaming (e.g., TikTok) for VIP users, the AI perception
model identifies and monitors their TikTok traffic in real
time. When service degradation is detected, QoS optimization
is triggered, incorporating application-specific requirements
and real-time network conditions to prioritize the VIP user’s
experience. AI plays a pivotal role in this optimization process:
prediction AI models can be trained to estimate user-specific
metrics such as data rate, latency, and QoE, enabling proactive
adjustments like priority-weighted resource scheduling and
dynamic radio resource allocation. Specifically, the AI-driven
optimization function can be formulated as:
ˆau = arg max
a∈A E [U (ˆqu(a, xu))] ,
where ˆau denotes the optimal action (e.g., scheduling weight,
resource allocation) selected for user u; xu represents the
observed context of user u, including application type, RAN
metrics, and mobility state; ˆqu(·) is the AI-predicted vector of
service-level quality metrics (e.g., latency, throughput, QoE);
A is the space of feasible actions; and U(·) is a utility
function reflecting the operator’s policy objective, such as
QoE maximization or latency minimization. This formulation
allows the centralized AI model to make proactive, context-
aware decisions tailored to individual users and applications.
Four representative test scenarios were selected for the
trial: central business districts (CBDs), university campuses,
hospital complexes, and residential zones. These scenarios
encompass diverse coverage conditions (with reference signal
receiving power (RSRP) ranging from -85 dBm to -115
dBm) and heterogeneous traffic load conditions, including
light traffic (physical resource block (PRB) utilization <30%),
medium load (PRB ∈[30%, 50%]), and heavy load (PRB
∈[50%, 70%]).
The AI-based service perception model was trained to clas-
sify 1000+ distinct application types, achieving an accuracy
exceeding 95%. Leveraging the CCU, the system enables real-
time identification of service types for 4,800 concurrent users
across 8 gNBs.
To validate performance, results for two representative ap-
plications—short video streaming and QR code scanning—are
analyzed. Fig. 13 and 14 illustrate the latency reductions
observed for these applications, respectively.
For short videos, as shown in Fig. 13, the proposed solu-
tion significantly reduces air interface latency across diverse
coverage and load conditions. In scenarios with poor coverage
(RSRP ≤-105 dBm) and heavy traffic loads (PRB utilization
≥50%), latency decreased by 33.6% and 30.5%, respectively.
The average air interface latency dropped from 43.0 ms to
32.0 ms, representing a 25.6% improvement.
Similarly, in Fig. 14, for QR code scanning application,
latency reductions of 25.9% and 26.8% were achieved in
scenarios with poor coverage (RSRP ≤-105 dBm) and heavy
traffic loads (PRB utilization ≥50%), respectively. The average
latency improved from 18.5 ms to 14.5 ms, yielding a 21.9%
overall reduction.
It is worth noting that the proposed service assurance
17
30.6
37.8
52.9
25.6
29.3
36.7
16.2%
22.5%
30.5%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
轻载<30%
中载【30,50】
重载【50,70】
Gain(%)
Latency(ms)
保障前
保障后
相对增益
23.3
28.1
41.7
68.8
21.1
24.2
31.3
45.7
9.3%
13.8%
24.9%
33.6%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
极好点
好点
中点
差点
Gain(%)
Latency(ms)
保障前
保障后
相对增益
Before
After
Relative gain
Extremely good 
point
Good point
Medium point
Bad point
Light load<30%
Medium load[30, 50]
Heavy load[50, 70]
Before
After
Relative gain
(a)
(b)
Fig. 13: Average air interface latency of short videos. (a) average latency (ms) vs. coverage; (b) average latency (ms) vs. load.
13.3
14.9
19.7
24.4
11.8
12.7
14.4
18.1
11.1%
15.3%
26.9%
25.9%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
极好点
好点
中点
差点
Gain(%)
Latency(ms)
保障前
保障后
相对增益
14.8
18.1
22.7
12.4
14.3
16.6
16.2%
20.5%
26.8%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
轻载<30%
中载【30,50】
重载【50,70】
Gain(%)
Latency(ms)
保障前
保障后
相对增益
Before
After
Relative gain
Good point
Medium point
Bad point
Light load<30%
Medium load[30, 50]
Heavy load[50, 70]
Before
After
Relative gain
(a)
(b)
Extremely good point
Fig. 14: Average air interface latency of QR code scanning application. (a) average latency vs. coverage; (b) average latency
vs. load.
3.6%
3.4%
3.2%
3.5%
5.2%
4.5%
4.2%
4.4%
5.7%
5.2%
4.0%
4.7%
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
CBD
高校
居民区
医院
轻载
中载
重载
College
Residential area
Hospital
Light load
Medium load
Heavy load
Fig. 15: Traffic volume growth under varying scenarios and
loads
framework not only enhances deterministic performance but
also boosts user traffic volume in 5G-A networks. Stabilized
radio link quality incentivizes applications like short video
platforms to dynamically upgrade streaming resolutions (e.g.,
from 720p to 1080p/4K), thereby improving user experience
and increasing per-user data consumption . As illustrated in
Fig. 15, the framework drives 3–6% traffic growth across
the four test scenarios, even under heterogeneous network
conditions.
Beyond technical performance improvements, the proposed
framework enables operators to adopt experience-centric mon-
etization strategies, shifting from traditional traffic-based mod-
els to value-added service tiers (e.g., premium ultra-low-
latency subscriptions). By ensuring deterministic performance
guarantees, the framework supports fine-grained service dif-
ferentiation that enhances QoE and drives user adoption of
premium offerings. It further positions operators to capitalize
on emerging 5G-A and future 6G ecosystems by transform-
ing network performance into a scalable revenue stream,
effectively aligning infrastructure investments with long-term
profitability.
D. Case Study 2: AI-enabled root cause analysis for poor user
experience
This use case targets the root causes of poor user experience
by leveraging multi-dimensional data across UE, network,
and application layers. A central AI unit enables fine-grained
application awareness, correlating service-level metrics (e.g.,
throughput, delay, loss) with RAN indicators like signal to
interference plus noise ratio (SINR), RSRP, handover failures,
and mobility traces. These enriched per-user datasets are
reported to the management system for real-time analysis. Fig.
16 illustrates one example of the correlated downlink TCP
round-trip time (RTT) data, synchronization signaling block
(SSB)-RSRP and SINR in the grid granularity in the field
trial, where the grid size is 50m × 50m. At the management
layer, multi-cell data and user session records (xDRs) are fused
to enable second-level, per-user, per-service correlation. An
XGBoost model classifies user types (e.g., indoor, outdoor,
high-speed) with over 90% precision, enabling tailored root
cause analysis. To enable such high-accuracy prediction, we
define a supervised learning model that maps multi-layer
network observations to user-level performance labels. To
enable such high-accuracy prediction, we define a supervised
learning model that maps multi-layer network observations to
user-level performance labels. The model predicts the user
state or root cause category ˆyu for each user u based on a
18
DL TCP RTT (ms)
SSB-RSRP (dBm)
SSB-SINR(dB)
Fig. 16: The grid level correlated data of DL TCP RTT, SSB-RSRP and SINR. The grid size is 50m × 50m.
fused feature vector:
ˆyu = fθ
 xApp
u , xRAN
u
, xUE
u , xMob
u

.
Here, fθ(·) denotes the AI model (e.g., XGBoost) param-
eterized by θ; xApp
u
includes application-layer features such
as TCP RTT and packet loss; xRAN
u
contains radio KPIs
such as SINR, RSRP, and handover statistics; xUE
u
repre-
sents device-level attributes; and xMob
u
captures spatiotemporal
mobility patterns (e.g., grid-based positioning). This fused
modeling framework enables second-level, per-user diagnosis
and supports high-precision classification across diverse radio
environments.
Temporal correlation techniques further pinpoint major per-
formance issues, such as coverage gaps, handover failures,
and interference. Compared to traditional rule-based methods,
this AI-driven approach improves root cause identification
accuracy by 20% and classification recall by 30%, enabling
scalable real-time diagnostics and more proactive network
optimization.
E. Case Study 3: AI-enabled network energy saving
This case study demonstrates the potential of AI to revolu-
tionize network energy management, offering a practical and
scalable approach for building adaptive and sustainable green
mobile networks.
To fully tap into energy-saving (ES) potential, China Mobile
has implemented more than 20 energy-saving technologies
across the time, frequency, spatial, and power domains in
its commercial 5G network. The core principle behind these
techniques is to dynamically align network resource utilization
with real-time traffic demand by switching off or scaling down
cells, carriers, antennas, or PAs during periods of low traffic.
To quantitatively assess the energy-saving potential of various
strategies, the total energy consumption of the network is
modeled as follows:
E =
N
X
n=0
M
X
m=0
T
X
t=0

P P A(P, m, t) + P transceiver(m, t) + P digital IF(m, t, C)

+
N
X
n=0
T
X
t=0

P baseband(t, C) + P0

.
In this model, E denotes the total energy consumption
over the network. N, M, and C represent the number of
base stations, channels (spatial domain), and carriers (fre-
quency domain), respectively. T denotes the operating time,
and P is the transmit power. P P A, P transceiver, P digital IF, and
P baseband denote the power consumption of power amplifiers,
transceivers, digital intermediate frequency modules, and base-
band processors, respectively. P0 represents the static power
consumption of other essential components. This formulation
allows for fine-grained analysis and comparison of energy
usage across different domains and system elements. However,
the above mentioned ES approaches often depend on manually
configured parameters, such as fixed time windows and static
traffic thresholds, which lack the agility to respond to dynamic
traffic patterns, resulting in suboptimal energy efficiency.
To overcome these limitations, two AI-enabled energy-
saving solutions are proposed and validated in the large-scale
field trial. For solution 1, AI is integrated into the network
management system to predict traffic patterns and dynami-
cally adjust energy-saving thresholds based on cell-level data
sampled at a 15-minute interval. This improves flexibility
over static configurations but remains limited by coarse data
granularity and slower reaction times. While for solution 2,
CCUs are further deployed at base stations to enable real-
time service type recognition. By identifying delay-tolerant
traffic, AI enables intelligent scheduling strategies such as
packet aggregation, extending radio resource sleep periods
without degrading user experience. This edge-intelligent ap-
proach complements centralized management and significantly
19
21.28%
26.60%
34.16%
0.00%
5.00%
10.00%
15.00%
20.00%
25.00%
30.00%
35.00%
ES w/o AI
ES w/ AI solution 1
ES w/ AI solution 2
Fig. 17: Performance gain of the AI-enabled energy saving.
boosts energy-saving efficiency through fine-grained, service-
aware optimization.
All results are benchmarked against a baseline scenario
without energy-saving mechanisms. Compared to this baseline,
the proposed AI-based approaches show significant improve-
ments: solution 1 achieves 26.6% energy saving, while solu-
tion 2 further increases the savings to 34.16%. This represents
an additional 5.32% and 12.88% improvement, respectively,
over traditional non-AI energy-saving methods.
F. Insights for 6G
The three-phase nationwide field trial is pivotal for ad-
vancing 6G and offers critical insights into the integration
of AI-Native architectures within 5G-A/6G RANs. Phase 1’s
validation of the CCU coordinating multiple gNBs—provides
a foundational reference for 6G standardization, demonstrat-
ing how centralized intelligence enhances resource efficiency
and deterministic service assurance. However, the trials also
revealed unresolved challenges: the absence of standardized
interfaces between the CCU and multi-vendor gNBs hindered
cross-platform collaborative inference, while the lack of modu-
lar API encapsulation for the AI capabilities limited their open-
ness and reusability across diverse scenarios. These findings
underscore the necessity for 6G standardization bodies to pri-
oritize interoperable AI service frameworks, enabling vendor-
agnostic coordination and flexible deployment of network-
native intelligence.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
This paper presents an operator-oriented view on AI-Native
RAN design for 6G, with a focus on potential Day 1 standard-
ization priorities. Building on a review of AI/ML integration
in 5G and 5G-A, we first articulate the concept of AI-
Native RAN and its three essential capabilities. For each
capability, we identify key enabling technologies and discuss
corresponding Day 1 standardization considerations.
The paper further articulated our perspective on the scope
and objectives of Day 1 standardization for AI-Native RAN
in 6G. In particular, we proposed that the introduction of
an AI Node is essential and should be realized from Day
1. To validate the proposed architecture, concepts, and key
enabling technologies, a large-scale field trial was conducted
throughout 2024, spanning 31 cities in China and involving
over 5000 5G-A base stations. The results demonstrated sig-
nificant improvements, including a 25.6% and 21.9% reduction
in latency for short video streaming and QR code scanning,
respectively, along with a 3–6% increase in overall network
traffic across diverse scenarios. The trial highlighted the
value of centralized AI in enhancing resource efficiency and
service assurance, while also revealing gaps in standardized
interfaces and modular APIs for AI capabilities. In addition,
field trials on energy saving and root cause analysis use
cases were performed. Notably, the proposed AI-driven root
cause analysis framework achieved up to 20% improvement in
diagnostic accuracy and a 30% gain in user type classification
recall compared to rule-based methods, enabling scalable and
proactive network optimization.
Moving forward, as the 6G standardization progresses, we
anticipate further refining the design of AI-Native RAN and
conducting more validations in diverse practical scenarios.
It is expected that the research and practice presented in
this paper will provide strong support for the standardization
and commercialization of 6G AI-Native RAN, and drive the
development of communication networks towards intelligence,
efficiency, and sustainability.
VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the National Key Re-
search and Development Program of China under Project
2022YFB2902100.
REFERENCES
[1] 3GPP, “Architecture enhancements for 5G System (5GS)
to support network data analytics services,” Technical
Specification (TS) 23.288, 2025.
[2] 3GPP, “Management and orchestration; Artificial Intelli-
gence/ Machine Learning (AI/ML) management,” Tech-
nical Specification (TS) 28.104, 2025.
[3] 3GPP, “Architecture enhancements for 5G System (5GS)
to support network data analytics services,” Technical
Specification (TS) 28.105, 2025.
[4] 3GPP, “Study on enhancement for data collection for NR
and ENDC,” Technical Report (TR) 37.817, 2019.
[5] 3GPP, “Study on Artificial Intelligence (AI)/Machine
Learning (ML) for NR air interface,” Technical Report
(TR) 38.843, 2019.
[6] 3GPP, “Study on Artificial Intelligence (AI)/Machine
Learning (ML) for mobility in NR,” Technical Report
(TR) 38.744, 2024.
[7] ITU-R M.2160, “Framework and overall objectives of the
future development of IMT for 2030 and beyond,” 2023.
[8] J. Wu, R. Li, X. An, C. Peng, Z. Liu, J. Crowcroft,
and H. Zhang, “Toward native artificial intelligence in 6g
networks: System design, architectures, and paradigms,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.02823, 2021.
[9] M. Iovene, L. Jonsson, D. Roeland, M. D’Angelo,
G. Hall, M. Erol-Kantarci, and J. Manocha, “Defining
ai native: A key enabler for advanced intelligent telecom
networks,” Ericsson white paper, 2023.
[10] J.
Hoydis,
F.
A.
Aoudia,
A.
Valcarce,
and
H. Viswanathan, “Toward a 6g ai-native air interface,”
20
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 59, no. 5, pp.
76–81, 2021.
[11] 3GPP. Overview of AI/ML related Work in 3GPP.
(2025, Feb. 16). [Online]. Available: https://docbox.etsi.
org/Workshop/2025/02 AICONFERENCE/SESSION05/
3GPPRAN MONTOJO JUAN QUALCOMM.pdf
[12] L. Kundu, X. Lin, R. Gadiyar, J.-F. Lacasse, and
S. Chowdhury, “Ai-ran: Transforming ran with ai-
driven
computing
infrastructure,”
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2501.09007, 2025.
[13] Q. Sun, N. Li, I. Chih-Lin, J. Huang, X. Xu, and Y. Xie,
“Intelligent ran automation for 5g and beyond,” IEEE
wireless communications, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 94–102,
2023.
[14] N. Li, Y. Wang, Q. Sun, X. Li, J. Huang, C. Liu,
Y. Huang, Z. Hu, Y. Han, and C.-L. I, “Rethinking ran
architecture for deep fusion of ai and communication in
6g,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 32, no. 3, pp.
164–174, 2025.
[15] 3GPP, “5G System (5GS); Study on traffic characteristics
and performance requirements for AI/ML model trans-
fer,” Technical Report (TR) 22.874, 2021.
[16] 3GPP, “System architecture for the 5G System (5GS),”
Technical Specification (TS) 23.501, 2025.
[17] 3GPP, “Data Collection and Reporting; General De-
scription and Architecture,” Technical Specification (TS)
26.531, 2024.
[18] 3GPP, “Study on Artificial Intelligence and Machine
learning in 5G media services,” Technical Report (TR)
26.531, 2025.
[19] 3GPP, “Study on 3GPP AI/ML Consistency Alignment,”
Technical Report (TR) 22.850, 2025.
[20] O-RAN Alliance, “O-RAN Architecture Description,”
Technical Specification (TS) WG1.OAD, 2024.
[21] O-RAN Alliance, “O-RAN Non-RT RIC: Architecture,”
Technical Specification (TS) WG2.Non-RT-RIC-ARCH,
2024.
[22] O-RAN Alliance, “O-RAN Near-RT RIC Architecture,”
Technical Specification (TS) WG3.RICARCH, 2024.
[23] O-RAN Alliance, “O-RAN Use Cases and Require-
ments,” Technical Specification (TS) WG3.UCR, 2024.
[24] ITU-T, “Architectural framework for machine learning in
future networks including IMT-2020,” Recommendations
ITU.Y.3172, 2019.
[25] ITU-T, “Autonomous networks - Architecture frame-
work,” Recommendations ITU.Y.3061, 2023.
[26] ETSI, “Experiential Networked Intelligence (ENI); ENI
requirements,” TS GS ENI 002, 2023.
[27] ETSI, “Zero-touch network and Service Management
(ZSM); Reference Architecture,” TS GS ZSM 002, 2019.
[28] 3GPP, “CMCC’s views on 6G RAN study,” Technical
Document 6GWS-250144, 2025.
[29] Yuan, Y., Qin, F., Liu, J. et al, “A unified data collection
framework based on the data plane for 6G.” Front Inform
Technol Electron Eng, vol. 26, p. 293–300, 2025.
[30] G. Qu, Q. Chen, W. Wei, Z. Lin, X. Chen, and K. Huang,
“Mobile edge intelligence for large language models: A
contemporary survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys &
Tutorials, 2025.
[31] N. Li, X. Li, Y. Yan, Q. Sun, Y. Han, and K. Cheng,
“Joint communication and computing resource optimiza-
tion for collaborative ai inference in mobile networks,”
in 2023 IEEE 98th Vehicular Technology Conference
(VTC2023-Fall), 2023, pp. 1–5.
[32] 3GPP, “Common API Framework for 3GPP Northbound
APIs,” Technical Specification (TS) 23.222, 2025.
[33] ITU-T.
Focus
Group
on
Artificial
Intelligence
Native
for
Telecommunication
Networks
(FG
AINN).
[Online].
Available:
https://www.itu.int/en/
ITU-T/focusgroups/ainn/Pages/default.aspx
