JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST XXXX
1
Training Machine Learning models at the Edge: A
Survey
Aymen Rayane Khouas, Mohamed Reda Bouadjenek, Hakim Hacid, and Sunil Aryal
Abstract—Edge computing has gained significant traction in re-
cent years, promising enhanced efficiency by integrating artificial
intelligence capabilities at the edge. While the focus has primarily
been on the deployment and inference of Machine Learning (ML)
models at the edge, the training aspect remains less explored.
This survey, explores the concept of edge learning, specifically
the optimization of ML model training at the edge. The ob-
jective is to comprehensively explore diverse approaches and
methodologies in edge learning, synthesize existing knowledge,
identify challenges, and highlight future trends. Utilizing Scopus
and Web of science advanced search, relevant literature on edge
learning was identified, revealing a concentration of research
efforts in distributed learning methods, particularly federated
learning. This survey further provides a guideline for comparing
techniques used to optimize ML for edge learning, along with an
exploration of the different frameworks, libraries, and simulation
tools available. In doing so, the paper contributes to a holistic
understanding of the current landscape and future directions in
the intersection of edge computing and machine learning, paving
the way for informed comparisons between optimization methods
and techniques designed for training on the edge.
Index Terms—Machine Learning; Edge Computing; Edge AI;
Edge Learning; On-Device Training; Edge intelligence; Artificial
Intelligence; IoT.
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, the fields of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and
Machine Learning (ML) have witnessed significant growth,
and have demonstrated remarkable success across various
industrial applications [1]. ML’s essence lies in the interplay
between algorithmic models and large quantities of data, as
the latter is often required to successfully train ML models.
Traditionally, datasets have been collected in cloud storage,
databases, and data lakes. These datasets are then processed
in central cloud servers to train various ML models.
Conversely, the rapid proliferation of smart devices and
sensors in recent years has led to an explosion of data
generation at the edge of the network. With edge devices
generating vast quantities of data closer to the source, growing
concerns about privacy and security, as well as the desire to
optimize the bandwidth consumption on the increasing number
of edge devices and reduce the computational load on cloud
servers, have driven a paradigm shift towards edge computing.
In this context, computational processes are decentralized and
A.R. Khouas, M. R. Bouadjenek, and A. Aryal are with the School of
Information Technology, Deakin University, Waurn Ponds Campus, Geelong,
VIC 3216, Australia. H. Hacid is with the Technology Innovation Institute,
UAE.
E-mail: a.khouas@deakin.edu.au (corresponding author)
Manuscript received XXX YY, ZZZZ; revised XXX YY, ZZZZ.
migrated to edge devices. This sets the stage for a novel
intersection between ML and edge computing.
This shift has sparked growing interest towards edge ML. A
union between machine learning and edge computing, deploy-
ing ML models at the edge, closer to end devices, enabling
inference or training to occur at the edge. Edge learning
is a subset of Edge ML that involves training ML models
directly at the edge. Traditionally, ML models have relied on
cloud infrastructure for training and deployment. However, this
approach poses several challenges. These include high latency,
significant communication overheads, and concerns around
data privacy and security. By processing data closer to its
source, edge learning tackles these challenges while enabling
real-time decision-making and reducing cloud resource usage.
Furthermore, this enables innovative ML applications, such as
privacy-aware recommendation systems and smart technolo-
gies. These applications span multiple industries, including
healthcare, manufacturing, agriculture, and space exploration.
Training ML models at the edge poses unique challenges
due to edge devices’ limited computational power and mem-
ory. Moreover, despite the abundance of data at the edge,
individual devices usually lack sufficient data to train ML
models from scratch. To address these challenges, techniques
like federated learning, knowledge distillation, and transfer
learning have been proposed. These methods aim to optimize
ML models to fit within the constraints of edge devices,
thereby rendering them suitable for training in resource-
constrained environments, scenarios with low data availability,
or through collaborative training across multiple edge devices
that leverage their collective data.
This survey paper aims to provide an overview on edge
learning, covering its methodologies, requirements, applica-
tions, challenges, and open research directions. We explore
state-of-the-art techniques for training and optimizing ML
models on edge devices, highlighting their advantages. Fur-
thermore, we compare these approaches, providing a broad
overview of their strengths and weaknesses. We also examine
the various applications that benefit from edge learning, as well
as the frameworks, libraries, and simulation tools that support
and optimize it. Please note that a background in ML and deep
learning is assumed for this survey, and readers without this
knowledge may find it helpful to consult a general introduction
to the field, such as the ones found in [2]–[5].
0000–0000/00$00.00 © 2024 IEEE
arXiv:2403.02619v3  [cs.LG]  11 Oct 2024
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST XXXX
2
A. Comparison with existing surveys
There have been considerable surveys about Edge ML that
attempts to define the field and present the different approaches
that exist for AI in Edge. Most of these surveys focus on
edge inference or on a single aspect of edge learning, such as
federated learning [6], [7] or on-device training [8], [9].
As previously defined, this survey provides a comprehensive
overview of training ML models on edge devices. This survey
has multiple contributions that we will use to compare with
the existing surveys. The contributions are presented in the
following five points that we will label as ”topics”.
1) Explore techniques: We examine various techniques for
optimizing the training of ML models on edge devices.
2) Metrics for Edge Learning: We define metrics to
evaluate and compare edge learning approaches, and
identify requirements for edge learning in real-world
scenarios.
3) Compare techniques: We compare the different edge
learning techniques based on their performance, require-
ments, and popularity.
4) Explore Types of ML: We examine various types of
ML, including unsupervised and reinforcement learning,
in the context of edge learning.
5) Explore tools and libraries: We survey tools and
libraries for training ML models on edge devices, as
well as simulations and emulators for edge learning.
6) Use-cases and applications: We present various use
cases and applications of edge learning explored in
academic research.
Table I present the relevant studies related to Edge ML,
and compare them to our survey based on the aforementioned
topics. The symbols used in the table convey the extent
to which each study addresses the different topics of edge
learning outlined previously.
1)
✓indicates that a survey comprehensively covers a
particular topic in the context of edge learning.
2) ◦denotes partial coverage of the topic, where a study
may focus on a specific subset of the topic. For exam-
ple, the surveys [6], [7], [10] explores techniques for
using/optimizing ML for the edge but only focus on
federated learning.
3)
• signifies that a survey touches on the topic, but its
primary emphasis lies on inference on the edge, rather
than training, which often results in less comprehensive
coverage of the training aspects.
4)
✗indicates that a study does not address the topic at
all.
B. Structure of the survey
This survey is organized into six main sections, excluding
this introduction and the conclusion (Section VIII). First,
Section II provides a detailed definition of edge computing,
edge learning and edge devices, and present the requirements
and metrics for training ML models at the edge. In Sec-
tion III, we explore the techniques used to enable, optimize,
and accelerate edge learning. A detailed comparison between
these techniques is presented in Section III-E. In Section IV,
we discuss the integration of different types of ML such
as unsupervised learning or reinforcement learning in the
edge, to leverage these techniques in edge learning, optimize
their performance, or enable the training of other models. In
Section V, we explore the use cases and current applications of
edge learning. Then in Section VI, we present different tools,
frameworks and libraries used to create simulations and train
ML models at the edge. Finally, Section VII identifies open
challenges and discusses potential future trends and research
directions in edge learning.
II. EDGE COMPUTING AND EDGE LEARNING
This section introduces the fundamental concepts of edge
computing, edge machine learning, and edge learning. We will
then examine the essential requirements of edge learning.
A. Edge Computing
Edge computing is a new computing paradigm that aims to
address the limitations of traditional cloud computing models
in handling large scale data generated by the increasing
number of smart devices connected to the Internet. It involves
performing calculations at the edge of the network, closer to
the user and the source of the data. Edge computing empha-
sizes local, small-scale data storage and processing, providing
benefits such as reduced bandwidth load, faster response
speed, improved security, and enhanced privacy compared to
traditional cloud computing models [34].
Edge computing addresses several limitations of cloud com-
puting, that stem from the frequent communications needed
between end/edge devices and cloud server, in the standard
cloud computing paradigm and the reliance of storing data
centrally, which might compromise the privacy or security of
sensible data.
• Reduced latency: Edge computing brings data process-
ing closer to the source, reducing the time it takes for data
to travel to a centralized cloud server, thereby reducing
latency and improving response time [35].
• Bandwidth reduction: Edge computing reduces the need
for transmitting large amounts of data to centralized cloud
servers, resulting in reduced bandwidth load and reduced
network congestion [34].
• Improved data privacy: Edge computing allows for
local data processing, reducing the need to transmit sensi-
tive data to centralized cloud servers, thereby minimizing
the risk of data breaches and unauthorized access [34].
• Operational resilience: Edge computing enables applica-
tions to continue functioning even in disconnected or low-
bandwidth environments, ensuring operational resilience
and reducing dependency on centralized cloud infrastruc-
tures [35].
Figure 1 shows the general architecture of edge computing,
inspired by the ones proposed in [11] and [36]. We define
edge devices as both edge servers and end devices, as well
as other types of devices that weren’t specifically mentioned
in the diagram, such as routers and routing switches. For a
deeper dive into edge computing, the reader can consult to
edge computing surveys such as [34], [37].
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST XXXX
3
TABLE I
SUMMARY OF EDGE MACHINE LEARNING RELATED SURVEYS
Survey
Year
Explore
techniques
Metrics for
Edge Learning
Compare
techniques
Explore Types
of ML
Explore tools
and libraries
Use-cases and
applications
Chen et al. [11]
2019
•
✗
•
✗
•
•
Wang et al. [12]
2020
•
✗
•
✗
•
•
Shi et al. [13]
2020
•
✗
•
✗
✗
✗
Xu et al. [14]
2020
•
✗
•
✗
✗
✗
Lim et al. [15]
2020
◦
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
Leon Veas et al. [16]
2021
•
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
Dhar et al. [9]
2021
◦
✗
◦
✗
✗
✗
Tak et al. [10]
2021
◦
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
Zhang et al. [17]
2021
•
✓
✗
✗
✓
✗
Murshed et al. [18]
2022
•
✗
✗
✗
•
•
Abreha et al. [6]
2022
◦
✗
✗
✗
◦
◦
Boobalan et al. [7]
2022
◦
✗
✗
✗
✗
◦
Joshi et al. [19]
2022
✓
✓
✓
✗
✗
✗
Cai et al. [20]
2022
•
✗
•
✗
✗
✗
Cui et al. [21]
2022
◦
✗
✗
✗
✗
◦
Imteaj et al. [22]
2022
◦
✗
◦
✗
✗
◦
Mendez et al. [23]
2022
✗
✗
✗
✗
•
✗
Filho et al. [24]
2022
•
✗
✗
✗
•
•
Ray et al. [25]
2022
✗
✗
✗
✗
•
✗
Li et al. [26]
2023
•
•
✓
✗
•
✗
Hua et al. [27]
2023
•
✗
✗
✗
✗
•
Zhu et al. [8]
2023
◦
✓
◦
✗
✗
✗
Wu et al. [28]
2023
◦
✗
◦
✗
✗
✗
Hoffpauir et al. [29]
2023
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
•
Barbuto et al. [30]
2023
•
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
Trinade et al. [31]
2024
◦
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
Grzesik et al. [32]
2024
✗
•
✗
✗
•
•
Jouini et al. [33]
2024
✗
✗
✗
✗
•
•
Our survey
2024
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓: Fully covers the topic of Edge Learning;
◦: Partially covers the topic of Edge Learning;
•: Focuses on both Edge Learning and Inference;
✗: Does not cover edge learning at all;
Cloud
Edge servers
End devices
Edge
Devices
Fig. 1. A typical architecture of edge computing
B. Edge Learning
A key advancement in edge computing is the integration of
AI and ML. Edge ML enables the training and deployment
of ML models directly on edge devices, which includes both
edge learning and edge inference. Edge learning, also known
as edge training, involves training ML models directly on edge
devices, reducing the reliance on centralized cloud infrastruc-
ture. In contrast, edge inference focuses on facilitating the
inference of ML models on resource-constrained edge devices,
regardless of where the models were trained [38]. Another
term commonly used in the literature is edge intelligence,
which shares similarities with edge ML. However, it also
includes data collection, caching, processing, and analysis at
the edge, making it a broader concept than edge ML [14].
While most Edge ML research focuses on edge infer-
ence [39], [40], edge learning remains a promising approach.
By enabling localized model training, edge learning can be
tailored to the specific requirements and resource constraints
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST XXXX
4
of edge devices, making it ideal for applications that require
privacy preservation and model customization for specific use
cases.
Edge Learning employs various strategies, most of them
are either categorized as distributed or collaborative learning
methods, which distribute the training of ML models across
multiple edge devices, such as federated or split learning; and
on-device learning, which involves training ML models on
individual edge devices, and may employ optimization or fine-
tuning techniques as necessary.
In this survey, we will explore both on-device learning and
distributed learning on edge devices. Distributed learning is
defined as the training of ML models collaboratively across
multiple devices. In contrast, on-device learning refers to the
training of ML models in a single device. To ensure clarity,
our definition of edge devices also encompasses edge servers,
network elements, and end devices. We comprehensively ad-
dress ML model training across all these devices.
C. Requirements for edge learning
The successful training of ML models at the edge requires
meeting specific requirements that dictate the efficiency and
performance of these models. These requirements are essential
for ensuring that the models perform optimally and efficiently
within the resource-constrained environment inherent to edge
devices. While there is no single metric to define the efficiency
of training ML models in the edge [41], different ones could be
constructed be used to evaluate if and how well the aforemen-
tioned requirements are met, and estimate the performances of
the model in resource’s contained environment.
1) Computational Efficiency: Computational Efficiency
refers to the ability of an algorithm to achieve high
performance with minimal computational cost. This is
especially important in the context of edge learning,
as edge devices often have limited computational re-
sources [39], and ML models typically require high
computational complexity for their training [42].
2) Memory Footprint Efficiency: Similarly to computa-
tional complexity, edge devices often have low memory
availability [43], [44], which contrast with the large
memory requirements of ML models.
3) Fast Training Time: Fast training time refers to the
rapid convergence of model parameters during the train-
ing phase. Fast training time is crucial for edge devices,
as it directly impacts their efficiency and responsiveness.
Edge devices are often characterized by limited compu-
tational capabilities, as mentioned earlier. As such, they
require ML models to be trained swiftly to minimize
the processing burden and reduce energy consumption.
Fast training time also enables models to adapt quickly
to changing data patterns, ensuring responsiveness and
adaptivity. This allows models to be efficiently updated
to address dynamic environments and changing user
requirements.
4) Minimized Bandwidth Consumption: Reducing band-
width usage involves minimizing data transfer be-
tween edge devices and improving communication ef-
ficiency among them. This is particularly important
for distributed learning techniques and especially in
bandwidth-limited systems, since these techniques re-
quire frequent sharing of the ML model across the
network devices.
5) Low Energy Consumption: Energy consumption is
a crucial consideration for edge devices, especially in
mobile edge computing. This is due to the limited
energy available on such devices. Therefore, ML models
trained at the edge must be energy-efficient to ensure
better computing performance, longer battery life, and
successful model training. Energy efficiency refers to
the ability to perform tasks or functions using minimal
energy. It involves reducing energy waste and optimizing
energy consumption.
6) Labelled Data Independency: Most edge-generated
data is unlabelled [45]. Therefore, using ML techniques
that can handle unlabeled data, such as unsupervised
(Section IV-A), self-supervised (Section IV-D), or semi-
supervised learning (Section IV-C), may be beneficial in
edge learning.
7) Task Specific Metrics and Performance: Since edge
learning encompass different ML tasks and use-cases.
Specific metrics and benchmarks are commonly used to
evaluate a model’s performance to assess its effective-
ness in achieving its intended goals.
III. OVERVIEW OF EDGE LEARNING TECHNIQUES
In general, edge ML training is similar to traditional ML
training, with the added requirements and constraints outlined
in Section II-C. The feasibility of training on the edge depends
on the resource requirements of the model, and the device
resources. Today, the increasing processing power, energy
storage, and memory capacity of edge devices [46] enables
small ML models to be trained on edge devices without
requiring significant optimization or distribution. For example,
KMeans in [47], Self-Organizing Map in [48] and SVM
in [49]. However, the training of more complex models that
require heavier resources, such as neural networks, is more
challenging at the edge. Therefore, in this section, we will
present an overview of techniques used to optimize the training
of more complex ML models on the edge. These techniques
include distributing training across multiple devices, cloud-
based training with local fine-tuning, and model optimization
or compression to enable edge training.
Figure 2 shows a global view of edge learning techniques
reviewed in this paper. The techniques are separated into four
categories: (i) Distributed or collaborative techniques, such as
federated or split learning; (ii) Techniques that rely on fine-
tuning of a model trained on the cloud, such as Transfer or
incremental learning; (iii) techniques that compress models
to facilitate or support the training on the edge, such as
quantization and knowledge distillation; (iv) And finally the
other optimization techniques that don’t fit neatly into the
previous categories.
A. Distributed and Collaborative Techniques
In this section, we will explore distributed techniques to
train ML models at the edge. They work by leveraging
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST XXXX
5
Edge Learning
Distributed and
collaborative learning (III-A)
Federated Learning (III-A1)
Split Learning (III-A2)
Swarm Learning (III-A3)
Gossip Learning (III-A3)
Adaptive and fine-tuning
based technique (III-B)
Transfer Learning (III-B1)
Incremental Learning (III-B2)
Meta Learning (III-B3)
Model compression (III-C)
Quantization (III-C2)
Knowledge Distillation (III-C1)
Model Pruning (III-C3)
Other optimization
methods (III-D)
Binary Neural Networks (III-D1)
Spiking Neural Networks (III-D2)
Forward-Forward Algorithm (III-D3)
Fig. 2. A taxonomy of techniques used to enable and/or optimize edge learning
the computational capabilities of multiple edge devices, and
aggregating their results, instead of relying on a single resource
constrained device.
1) Federated Learning: Federated Learning (FL), offers
a transformative approach to decentralized model training.
In the context of edge learning, where data is distributed
across numerous edge devices, FL enables collaborative train-
ing without centralizing sensitive data [50]. This technique
involves training a shared model across these devices by
iteratively updating it based on local data, with the objective of
preserving data privacy [51]–[53]. FL has been widely adopted
for edge learning [6], with applications in various domains,
including cyberattack detection [54], [55], spam detection [56],
[57], smart cities [58], [59], and autonomous vehicles [60].
In order to train an FL algorithm, an aggregation method is
needed. Federated learning aims to generate a global model by
aggregating local models from multiple clients. This process
combines individual models to create a generalized one that
represents the collective knowledge of all clients. The main
two aggregation methods being, Federated Stochastic Gradient
Descent (FedSGD) and Federated Averaging (FedAVG) [50].
However, other approaches have been proposed over the years
such as EdgeFed [61] which reduces FedAvg’s computational
overhead by separating the process of updating the local model
that is supposed to be completed independently by mobile
devices, or FedSel [62] which addresses FedSGD’s dimension
dependency problem, by selecting Top-k dimensions according
to their contributions in each iteration. Other approaches
include MTFeeL [63], FedDynamic [64], FedNets [65], Fed-
Com [66], FedGPO [67], and FedOVA [68].
Despite its growing popularity and multiple benefits, tradi-
tional FL models suffer from some limitations. For instance,
Non-IID (Non-Independent and Identically Distributed) data
often negatively impacts the performance of the global
model [64]. FL is also vulnerable to malicious and low-quality
users [69], emerging new classes with completely unseen data
distributions whose data cannot be accessed by the global
server or other users [70] as well as single node failure [71],
[72], channel bandwidth bottlenecks [73], and scaling issues
for increasing network size [71]. To solve the low performance
with Non-IID data challenge, Hybrid FL approaches have
been proposed [74], where very small amounts of data is
shared between participants. Other approaches that aim to
solve this problem include FedNets [65], FedDynamic [64]
and [75] which proposes a one-shot neural architecture search
technique. In contrast, pairwise correlated agreement [69], is
a method that aims to evaluate individual users’ contribution
to avoid malicious and low-quality contributions from users.
Sharma et al. [76] proposes a framework to study different
noise patterns in user feedback, and explore noise-robust
mitigation techniques for training FL models. Finally, [70]
proposes a unified zero-shot framework to handle emerging
classes in edge devices.
Hierarchical federated learning, an extension of FL, in-
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST XXXX
6
troduces a multi-level architecture [77], which enables more
efficient communication and computation trade-offs [78]. Fur-
thermore, they facilitate faster model training and reduce
energy consumption by offloading tasks to edge servers for
partial model aggregation to reduce network traffic [79]. For
instance, [80] proposes a hierarchical training algorithms that
address challenges in helper scheduling and communication
resource allocation. While
[79] developed a task offloading
approach based on data and resource heterogeneity to improve
training performance and reduce system cost. Other variations
of FL include blind federated edge learning [81], modular
federated learning [82], and clustered federated learning [83]
which will be presented in more details in section IV-A.
There is a growing interest in training language and multi-
media models at the edge using FL, with several approaches
being proposed in recent years. While the training of Large
Language Models (LLMs) using FL is still experimental, some
approaches have been proposed such as FATE-LLM [84] and
FwdLLM [85] which aim to fine-tune a billion parameter
language models across mobile devices using FL. In contrast,
relatively smaller language models like BERT [86] have
been extensively explored using FL, with approaches such
as FedBERT [87] that uses FL and SL approaches for pre-
training BERT in a federated way. FedSplitBERT [88] ad-
dresses the challenges of heterogeneous data and decreases the
communication cost by splitting BERT encoder layers into two
parts. A local part trained on the client-side and a global part
trained by aggregating gradients of multiple clients. Another
example is FedSPAM [56], which fine-tunes a distilBERT
model [89] using FL on mobile devices to detect spams
in SMSes. In computer vision, FedVKD [90] was proposed
as a federated knowledge distillation training algorithm to
train small CNN models on edge devices. Periodically, the
knowledge from these models is transferred to a large server-
side vision transformer encoder via knowledge distillation. On
the other hand, [91] introduces an FL approach for visual
classification with real-world data distribution. Finally, training
audio models at the edge using FL is wildly explored for
tasks such as speech recognition [92]–[96] or audio classi-
fication [70], [97].
One important concept usually related to FL is differential
privacy. Differential privacy is a privacy preservation tech-
nique that involves adding artificial noise to protect individual
privacy while maintaining model utility [98]. [99] provides
a detailed examination of differential privacy while [100]
and [101] provides an exploration of differential privacy in
the context of FL.
FL is also used alongside other techniques presented in this
survey, such as split learning [102], meta learning [103], [104],
transfer learning [105], knowledge distillation [28], [106],
[107], and Quantization [88], [107], [108], etc.
2) Split Learning: Split learning offers an alternative ap-
proach to collaborative learning. In contrast to FL, which
involves training models on local data from different devices
and aggregating them on a central server, split learning takes
a different approach. Specifically, it divides the model into
sections, with each section trained on a different client or
server, and instead of transferring raw data, only the weights
of the last layer of each section are sent to the next client.
This process ensures model improvement while maintaining
better data and model privacy than FL, thanks to the model
architecture split between clients and the server. Addition-
ally, this split makes split learning a more suitable option
for resource-constrained environments, where computational
resources are limited. However, this approach comes at the
cost of slower processing than FL, which is due to its relay-
based training [102].
In recent years, there has been a growing interest in split
learning at the edge, as evident from the increasing number of
studies in this area (see figure 3). For instance, SplitEasy [109]
is a framework that enables the training ML models on mobile
devices using split learning. Another paper, [110] proposes
a data protection approach for split learning without com-
promising the model accuracy. Additionally, [111] proposes
an online model splitting method with resource provisioning
game scheme which aims to minimize the total time cost of
participating devices. Adaptive split learning, is a branch of
split learning that aims to overcome its shortcomings compared
to FL. Specifically, it addresses these challenges by eliminating
the transmission of gradients from the server to the client,
resulting in a smaller payload and reduced communication
cost, and allowing the client to update only sparse partitions of
the server model, adapting to the variable resource budgets of
different clients which decreases the computation cost and im-
proves performance across heterogeneous clients [112], [113].
Other adaptative approaches include ARES [114] and [115].
Finally, split learning has been combined with FL in multiple
approaches in order to eliminate both techniques’ inherent
drawbacks, notably in [90], [102], [116]–[120].
3) Other Collaborative Learning methods: Several dis-
tributed learning techniques have been proposed as alternatives
to FL and split learning. Swarm learning, an innovative
approach integrating artificial and biological intelligence, ad-
dresses challenges in distributed ML for the edge. This method
efficiently utilizes signal processing and communication tech-
niques to operate in real-time within large-scale edge IoT
environments, offering advantages in overcoming communi-
cation bottlenecks, diverse data, non-convex optimization, and
privacy concerns [121]. Another approach to swarm learning,
CB-DSL [122], a Communication-efficient and Byzantine-
robust Distributed Swarm Learning technique, was introduced
to deal with Non-IID data issues and byzantine attacks.
Another noteworthy distributed learning method is gossip
learning, which, like other collaborative methods, doesn’t
require transferring data outside edge devices. However, unlike
FL and other methods, gossip learning operates without a
central server for model aggregation and lacks reliance on
central control [123]. Notable extensions to gossip learning,
such as the one proposed by [124], enhance the algorithm by
incorporating additional memory for storing local caches of
model updates, making it more suitable for mobile devices.
B. Adaptive and Fine-tuning based Techniques
In this section, we discuss techniques for efficiently adapting
and fine-tuning pre-trained ML models at the edge without
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST XXXX
7
requiring a complete retraining. The focus of these techniques
is on preserving privacy and achieving personalized perfor-
mance, while reducing computational overhead by keeping the
heaviest part of the training in the cloud or edge servers, either
using public datasets or ethically collected data. We explore
three approaches: transfer learning, incremental learning, and
meta learning. These methods enable edge devices to leverage
previously acquired knowledge, adapt to local data distribu-
tions, and the continuous improvement of the models on the
edge.
1) Transfer Learning: Transfer learning is an ML technique
where knowledge gained from solving one problem is applied
to a different, yet related, problem. Instead of building models
from scratch, transfer learning employs pre-trained models on
large datasets to extract valuable insights, such as learned
features or representations. These insights are then used to
enhance the performance of a new task, especially when
limited data is available for that task. By capitalizing on ex-
isting knowledge, transfer learning accelerates model training,
improves generalization, and proves exceptionally useful in
domains where data scarcity poses a challenge [125]. For a
more detailed understanding of transfer learning, readers are
encouraged to review the surveys [125]–[127].
In the context of edge learning, transfer learning is a
prominent technique used to fine-tune ML models based on
local data in an edge device. This approach serves as a fully
on-device alternative to collaborative learning methods that
distribute the training across different devices [44]. Notable
state-of-the-art methods for transfer learning in edge learning
include tiny-transfer learning [43], which addresses the critical
issue of memory efficiency in low-memory edge devices. This
is achieved this by freezing the weights of the model and
only learning a memory-efficient bias module, thus removing
the need to store the intermediate activations. Similarly, Rep-
Net [128] proposes an intermediate feature re-programming
of a pre-trained model with a tiny reprogramming network
to develop memory-efficient on-device transfer learning. Mo-
bileTL [129] also proposes a memory and computationally
efficient on-device transfer learning method, specifically de-
signed for models built with inverted residual blocks. Addi-
tionally, [130] propose an edge CNN framework for 5G indus-
trial edge networks, with the CNN model trained in advance in
an edge server, which is further fine-tuned based on the limited
datasets uploaded from the devices with the aid of transfer
learning, and [131] proposes a runtime convergence monitor
to achieve massive computational savings in the practical on-
device training workloads. Multiple approaches also focus
on combining transfer learning with FL, to create federated
transfer learning algorithms [132], that aim to leverage FL
for privacy preservation, and use transfer learning to train a
well-performing local model despite users usually having not
enough data for that by training the base model with a public
dataset and passing it to the federated users to be fine-tuned for
the target task [105], [133]. Finally, [134] proposes freeze and
reconfigure, a transfer learning method for on-device training
of a BERT model.
2) Incremental Learning: Incremental learning also known
as continual learning or life-long learning, involves continu-
ously updating and expanding a model’s knowledge as new
data becomes available. Unlike traditional batch learning,
where models are trained from scratch on entire datasets,
incremental learning dynamically incorporates new informa-
tion without discarding previously acquired knowledge [135],
and can be used to reduce/overcome the well-known issue
of catastrophic forgetting in deep neural networks [136]–
[138]. Readers seeking a more thorough understanding of
incremental learning are directed to [139].
There have been considerable attempts of implementing
incremental learning in the context of edge learning. These
include: learning with sharing [140] which aims to reduce the
training complexity and memory requirements while achieving
high accuracy during the incremental learning process and
bypass the considerable memory requirements that can make
incremental learning unsuited for edge devices; PILOTE [136]
which trains an incremental learning model on edge devices
for human activity recognition; [141] introduces an incremen-
tal algorithm based on transfer learning and k-nearest neighbor
to support the on-device learning; RIANN [142] is an indexing
and search system for graph-based approximate nearest neigh-
bor algorithm for mobile devices; and RILOD [143] which
aims to incrementally train an existing object detection model
to detect new object classes without losing its capability to
detect old classes, to avoid catastrophic forgetting. RILOD
distills three types of knowledge from the old model to mimic
the old model’s behaviour on object classification, bounding
box regression and feature extraction, and it was implemented
under both edge-cloud and edge-only setups [143]. There
are a variety of promising approaches and directions for
incremental learning on the edge from combining it with other
techniques (such as FL [144], [145], meta learning [145],
[146] and compression methods [147]–[149]) to sparse [150]
or distributed continual learning [148].
3) Meta-learning: Meta learning focus on enhancing a
model’s ability to learn new tasks quickly and effectively.
Unlike traditional learning paradigms that optimize for a
specific task, meta learning trains models to learn from a
diverse set of tasks, thereby enabling them to generalize
knowledge and adapt rapidly to novel tasks with minimal
data [151]. By exposing models to various learning scenarios,
meta learning equips them with transferable skills, such as
recognizing patterns and adapting to new contexts. For further
insight into meta learning, we recommend consulting [152],
[153].
In the context of edge learning, the application of meta
learning introduces a transformative approach to address the
challenges posed by limited data availability and resource
constraints [154], [155]. [156] proposes adaptation-aware net-
work pruning, a model pruning method designed to work
with existing meta learning methods to achieve fast adaptation
on edge devices, while [146] proposes a continual meta-
learning approach with bayesian graph neural networks that
mathematically formulates meta-learning as continual learning
of a sequence of tasks, and p-Meta was introduced in [154],
and aims to achieve faster generalization to unseen tasks and
enforces structure-wise partial parameter updates to support
memory-efficient adaptation. Meta learning can also be used
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST XXXX
8
in combination with other techniques such as FL [145],
[157], or [103] which integrates reinforcement learning models
trained by multiple edge devices into a general model based
on a meta-learning approach, in order to create FedMC, a
generalized federated reinforcement learning framework based
on a meta-learning approach.
C. Model Compression based Techniques
This section explores model compression techniques, which
aim to streamline the training of ML models at the edge. As
traditional deployment and inference solutions have embraced
knowledge distillation, quantization, and model pruning to
accelerate model execution on resource-constrained devices, a
notable shift is observed towards employing these techniques
for reducing the complexity of ML models for the training
in the edge, making these techniques helpful for the training
phase as well.
1) Knowledge distillation: Knowledge distillation in deep
learning is a process whereby a small or student neural
network is trained to emulate the knowledge and predictive
capabilities of a larger or teacher network. This technique
serves as a means to transfer the expertise and generalization
capabilities of a complex model to a simpler one. As a result,
inference efficiency is enhanced, and computational demands
are reduced. The underlying principle involves the student
network learning not only from ground truth labels but also
from the soft, probabilistic outputs of the teacher network,
thereby capturing finer details and nuances in the data [158].
For a deeper dive into knowledge distillation, readers can refer
to the following survey [158]. In the context of edge learning,
knowledge distillation is usually used to reduce the size and
complexity of a large neural network, to simplify its training
in limited resources devices. Therefore, knowledge distillation
is well suited to be used in collaboration with other techniques
such as federated learning [28], [106], split learning [159] or
incremental learning [147]. However, distillation is also used
independently of other techniques [160], [161].
The integration of knowledge distillation with FL on
edge devices has shown promising results, with recent
trends indicating great potential in combining the two tech-
niques [28]. Several approaches have been proposed, includ-
ing attack-resistant FL methods [162], speech recognition
tasks [96] or keyword spotting [163]. Mix2FLD [164] is
another method that combines knowledge distillation and
FL. Meanwhile, [107] use both distillation and quantization
to train FL models on edge devices. Several other hybrid
approaches combining FL and knowledge distillation have
been explored [165], [166]. These approaches are further
discussed in Wu et al.’s survey on knowledge distillation in
federated edge learning [28]. Knowledge distillation can also
be applied to other distributed learning methods, such as [159],
which introduces a spatio-temporal distillation method for split
learning for a tiny server in order to alleviate the frequent
communication costs that happen when communicating from
the server to edge devices. [167] introduces a distributed
distillation algorithm where devices communicate and learn
from soft-decision outputs, which are inherently architecture-
agnostic and scale only with the number of classes in or-
der to alleviate the communication costs from transmitting
model weights in the network and improve the inclusion of
devices with different model architectures. Finally, knowledge
distillation has been used as a standalone technique in an
edge learning context, for recommendation systems [160],
[168], [169], edge cardiac disease detection [170] and on-
device deep reinforcement learning [171]. Knowledge distilla-
tion was, additionally, used with multiple variants, including
dataset distillation techniques [172], [173] and knowledge
transfer [161], [174].
2) Quantization: Quantization in deep learning refers to
the process of reducing the precision of numerical values
representing model parameters or activations, typically from
floating-point to fixed-point or integer representations, in or-
der to balance the act of maintaining an acceptable level
of model accuracy while significantly reducing the memory
and computational requirements [175]. This computational
optimization technique is pivotal in mitigating the resource-
intensive demands of deep neural networks, rendering them
more amenable for resource-constrained hardware platforms,
such as edge devices and embedded systems. There are
two types of quantization: quantization-aware training and
post-training quantization. In quantization-aware training, the
quantized model is fine-tuned using training data in order
to adjust parameters and recover accuracy degradation or
perturbation introduced by the quantization. In contrast, post-
training quantization is a less expensive approach, where the
pretrained model is quantized and its weight adjusted without
any fine tuning [175]. To gain a more complete understanding
of quantization techniques, readers are advised to consult [175]
Quantization techniques are not only used to optimize
machine learning models before deployment for edge infer-
ence [131], [176], but also in edge learning to simplify the
fine-tuning of large models [44], [177]. Similarly to knowledge
distillation, quantization is often used alongside other tech-
niques such as FL [178], transfer Learning [44], incremental
learning [179] or with other types of techniques [180]. Quanti-
zation is used with FL particularly extensively, including one-
bit quantization [181]–[183] and hierarchical FL [108]. Other
FL-based approaches that utilize quantization include [107],
[184]–[188]. Other quantization-based methods for training
ML models in the edge include quantization-aware scaling,
which was proposed in [44]. This method automatically scales
the gradient of tensors with different bit-precisions without
requiring any fine-tuning, and was used alongside a tiny
training engine and sparse updates. Investigations in [189]
showed that quantization helps further in reducing the resource
requirements for the training on on-device few shot learning
for audio classification. The Holmes optimizer [190] uses
quantization to improve the accuracy by combining different
quantization techniques, such as limiting quantization bits,
fixed-point numbers, and logarithmic quantization.
3) Model Pruning: Model pruning is a technique used to
reduce the size of ML models by removing certain parts
of the model, such as model parameters, nodes in a de-
cision tree [191] or weight matrices in transformer-based
models [192]. Similarly to quantization, model pruning is
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST XXXX
9
commonly used in the edge to reduce the computational
resources required for the inference of ML models [193].
Model pruning has also shown great potential in edge learn-
ing, where it reduces the size of ML model before fine-
tuning on edge devices. This technique is particularly effec-
tive when used in conjunction with other methods, such as
FL [186], [194]–[196], incremental learning [141], [149] or
meta-learning [156].
Similar to knowledge distillation and quantization, FL
emerges
as
the
most
prominent
technique
when
com-
bined with model pruning for edge learning. Noteworthy is
PruneFL [195], an approach aimed at minimizing communi-
cation and computation overhead while reducing training time
through adaptive model size adjustment during FL. PruneFL
employs model pruning, starting with an initial pruning stage
at a selected client, followed by subsequent pruning iterations
during FL. Other approaches that combine model pruning with
FL include [196] which introduces model pruning for wireless
FL to scale down neural networks. Meanwhile, [194] employ
an adaptive dynamic pruning approach to prevent overfitting
by slimming the model through the dropout of unimportant
parameters. In addition, several approaches use model pruning
on edge devices. For instance, [197] uses model pruning in
the context of on-device personalization for an activity recog-
nition system, and Deeprec [198] leverages model pruning
and embedding sparsity techniques to reduce computation
and network overhead. Furthermore, OmniDRL [199], a deep
reinforcement learning based approach on edge devices, incor-
porates weight pruning in each learning iteration to achieve
a high weight compression ratio. Finally, [200] explores the
reduction in memory footprint for further pruning during
the training phase of BitTrain, a bitmap memory efficient
compression technique for training on edge devices.
D. Optimization and Acceleration based Techniques
In this section, we explore some other techniques that don’t
fit neatly into a specific category and are used to optimize
or provide more optimized alternatives to machine learning
models’ enabling them to be more suitable for edge learning.
1) Binary
neural
networks:
Binary
Neural
Networks
(BNNs) are deep neural networks that use binary values (-1
or 1) instead of floating-point numbers for weights and activa-
tions. BNNs are attractive for resource-constrained devices be-
cause of their ability to compress deep neural networks [201].
BNNs share similarities with other techniques, such as quan-
tization and model pruning, which are also considered good
candidates for edge inference due to their extreme compute
and memory savings over higher-precision alternatives [202].
However, BNNs’ compute and memory efficiency can also
be leveraged for edge learning. For example, by proposing a
hybrid quantization of a continual learning model [203], or by
developing a model based on an MRAM array with ternary
gradients for both training and inference on the edge [204].
Other BNN based approaches for edge learning include [202],
[205], [206].
2) Spiking neural networks:
Spiking neural networks
(SNNs) are another type of deep neural networks that are
promising for the edge. SNNs communicate between neurons
using events called spikes [207] and are known for their
asynchronous and sparse computations. These properties result
in decreased energy consumption [208], [209], which makes
them well suited for energy limited devices [210]. Training
ML models at the edge using SNNs has gained some attention
in recent years. For example, [211] proposes FL-SNN, a co-
operative training through FL for networked on-device SNNs,
while [212] presents a memristor spiking neuron and synaptic
trace circuits for efficient on device learning. Other approaches
include integrating meta-learning with SNNs for lifelong
learning on a stream of tasks with local backpropagation-
free nested updates [155], and using event-driven, power and
memory-efficient local learning rules, such as spike-timing-
dependent plasticity [213]. There are other approaches that
leverage SNNs for edge learning, including [214]–[216].
3) Forward-Forward Algorithm: The backpropagation al-
gorithm is essential for training neural networks, but recent
studies have proposed alternatives to the algorithm when the
available resources are limited. One such algorithm is the
forward-forward [217] algorithm, which replaces the forward
and backward passes of backpropagation by two forward
passes that operate in the same way as each other on different
data with opposite objectives. A positive pass operates on real
data and adjusts the weights to increase the goodness in every
hidden layer, while a negative pass operates on ”negative data”
and adjusts the weights to decrease the goodness in every
hidden layer [217]. To adapt the forward-forward algorithm
to edge devices, researchers have proposed variations such
as µ-FF [218], which uses a multivariate ridge regression
approach and allows finding closed-form solution by using
the mean squared error. Another study [219] investigates the
improvements in terms of complexity and memory usage
brought by PEPITA [220] and the forward-forward algo-
rithm. the results show that the forward-forward algorithm
reduces memory consumption by 40% on average, but involves
additional computation at inference that, can be costly on
microcontrollers.
4) Other techniques: In this section, we will explore some
other techniques used to optimize ML models for training
in the edge. One such technique is data booleanization, used
in [221], which proposes a novel approach towards low-energy
booleanization. MiniLearn [222] on the other hand, enables re-
training of deep neural networks on resource-constrained IoT
devices. This allows them to re-train and optimize pre-trained,
quantized neural networks using IoT data collected during
deployment. Another approach is the use of echo state net-
works for anomaly detection in aerospace applications [223].
Tiny training engine [44] is a lightweight training system,
introduced alongside sparse update, a technique that skip the
gradient computation of less important layers and sub-tensors,
and a quantization-aware scaling to stabilize 8-bit quantized
training. Tiny training engine enables on-device training of
convolutional neural networks under 256KB of SRAM and
1MB flash without auxiliary memory [44].
[224] introduces a novel reduced precision optimization
technique for on-device learning primitives on MCU class de-
vices with a specialized shape transform operators and matrix
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST XXXX
10
multiplication kernels, which is accelerated with paralleliza-
tion and loop unrolling for the backpropagation algorithm.
In addition, POET [225] allows for the training of large
neural networks on memory scarce and battery-operated edge
devices, with integrated rematerialization and paging. POET
reduce the memory consumption of backpropagation, allowing
the fine-tuning of both ResNet-18 and BERT within edge
devices’ memory constraints. Finally, [180] proposes a novel
rank-adaptive tensor-based tensorized neural network mode for
on-device training with ultra-low memory usage.
E. Comparison of techniques used in edge learning
In this section we will compare the different fami-
lies of techniques used to train ML models in the edge
that we explored in the previous part of this paper (sec-
tions III-A, III-B, III-C, III-D), we will compare the different
families based on two factors: (i) The number of academic
contributions of each family and their evolution over the years;
(ii) The techniques’ potential of answering the different needs
and requirements particular to edge learning.
1) Comparison of the usage of the different techniques:
We will first start by comparing the different edge learning
techniques over the years by analyzing their academic contri-
butions. Figure 3 shows the number of papers per technique
per year on a logarithmic scale. We used the advanced
search features of Scopus1 and Web of Science2 to get the
data. Using those search engines, we searched for the terms
”edge learning”, ”Edge Intelligence”, ”training/learning on
the edge/mobile devices”, ”on-device training/learning” and
”on-device adaptation” as well as relevant keywords for each
technique (”Federated Learning”, ”Split Learning”, etc.), in the
title, keywords and abstract. We excluded surveys, books, and
notes, as we are only interested in technical contributions to
optimizing ML model training on the edge using the afore-
mentioned techniques. Additionally, we manually reviewed
each paper and removed papers that either didn’t provide a
technical contribution, or weren’t about training ML models
on the edge, despite containing relevant keywords. Finally, we
added a few manually found papers that were not indexed in
both Scopus and Web of Science or did not contain the relevant
keywords, but were still relevant to our analysis. Note that
we excluded the families of techniques that had less than 10
papers in total for edge learning. The excluded techniques are:
swarm learning, gossip learning, forward-forward, BNNs and
SNNs. The final number of papers associated with the analysis
was 803 papers, and some of these papers were briefly covered
in III. Note that multiple techniques can be used in a single
paper (see Figure 4), therefore the total count of techniques
in the Figure 3 will exceed 803. The cut-off date for the year
2024 is the 20th July 2024.
The analysis of Figure 3 reveals that FL is the dominant
approach for training ML models in edge environments, given
the resource constraints of edge devices. This dominance is
1Scopus: https://www.scopus.com/
2Web
of
Science:
https://clarivate.com/products/
scientific-and-academic-research/research-discovery-and-workflow-solutions/
webofscience-platform/
expected, as distributed learning methods that capitalize on the
collective computing power of multiple devices are deemed
more practical and efficient in edge settings. Moreover, we
anticipate that this trend will persist and expand to include
split learning, another promising distributed learning tech-
nique. Other methods, including incremental learning, transfer
learning, Model Compression Techniques (e.g., quantization,
knowledge distillation), although consistently employed, lag
behind FL in terms of popularity. A closer examination of
Figure 3 unveils a remarkable surge in the number of pub-
lications focused on edge learning over the past six years.
Notably, there has been a steady rise in the adoption of FL and
split learning, aligning with our forecast of a trend favoring
these two techniques. In contrast, the use of techniques like
incremental learning and transfer learning has been more
steady during the same period, and meta-learning despite being
employed consistently in previous years received less attention
in 2023. Finally, for the model compression techniques while
quantization and knowledge distillation experienced a small
rise in popularity over the years, model pruning has exhibited
greater fluctuation during that period.
As previously discussed, various approaches have been
proposed that integrate multiple techniques to mitigate the
limitations of individual methods and capitalize on their re-
spective strengths. Examples of such approaches include [102],
[132], [145], [146]. To provide a clearer illustration of the
relationships between these various techniques, a heatmap de-
picting the intersection of their usage is presented in Figure 4.
This visual representation allows for a more comprehensive
understanding of the synergies and overlap between different
approaches. The heatmap includes all the technique families
discussed in Section III, except for swarm learning, gossip
learning, and the forward-forward algorithm, which have not
been combined with other techniques in the context of edge
learning to our knowledge. We can note that FL has been
combined the most with other techniques, which is expected
considering the overwhelming number of FL contributions
to the edge (see Figure 3). Furthermore, model compression
techniques such as knowledge distillation, model pruning and
quantization are also often used together with other techniques
as discussed in Sections (III-C1 III-C2 III-C3). Finally, we can
observe other collaborations between the different families,
and we expect this trend to continue in the future.
2) Comparison based on the requirements and needs of
edge learning: As outlined in Section II-C, there are several
requirements that must be met for edge learning, which can
function as imprecise measures for assessing the viability of
the families of techniques covered in earlier sections for the
training in the edge. Upon reevaluating the requirements, we
excluded “labelled data independence” from the comparison,
as it is more related to the type of ML employed or the
availability of an autolabeling process rather than to the
techniques being evaluated. Furthermore, we do not consider
“task-specific metrics and performance” as this encompasses
multiple metrics that vary depending on the specific task at
hand. However, we introduce a “high performance” measure to
estimate roughly if the strategies positively or negatively affect
the performances. For instance, model compression techniques
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST XXXX
11
Pre-2020
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
Year
100
101
102
Number of Papers
Quantization
Incremental Learning
Federated Learning
Transfer Learning
Knowledge Distillation
Model Pruning
Meta Learning
Split Learning
Fig. 3. Trend of techniques used to train ML models in the edge over the years
Federated Learning
Split Learning
Transfer Learning
Incremental Learning
Meta Learning
Quantization
Knowledge Distillation
Model Pruning
Binary Neural Networks
Split Learning
Transfer Learning
Incremental Learning
Meta Learning
Quantization
Knowledge Distillation
Model Pruning
Binary Neural Networks
Spiked Neural Networks
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Fig. 4.
Trend of different techniques used hand in hand for training ML
models at the edge. Color intensity represents the number of papers
often lower model performance, whereas incremental and
meta-learning typically boost it. As a result, we use six distinct
measures to evaluate the techniques: computational efficiency,
memory footprint, low energy consumption, quick training
time, reduced bandwidth, and high performance. Table II
compares the various families of techniques against these
requirements.
The outcomes, as depicted in Table II, should be inter-
preted as informal and approximate assessments aimed at
providing a broad understanding of the general strengths and
weaknesses of the compared techniques within the context of
edge learning. A checkmark (”✓”) implies that, in general,
the technique offers assistance or advantages when applied
to edge learning with respect to the specified requirement.
Conversely, a cross mark (”✗”) indicates that, in general,
the requirement represents a weakness of the technique in
the edge learning context. It is important to note that tech-
niques like FL, quantization, and others have various variants
and specific approaches that influence how these methods
align with the requirements. For instance, while quantization
techniques may result in a minor decrease in performance
in most scenarios [226], leading to an ”✗” check in the
”High Performance” column. Certain specific approaches to
quantization may exceptionally yield no performance loss or
even improvements, as demonstrated in studies such as [190].
Therefore, it is important to note that the assessment provided
by these symbols should be considered as rough estimates,
as the effectiveness of a technique, and how it fares against
a specific requirement, can vary depending on diverse factors
such as variant versions, implementation details, use cases,
tasks, and hardware platforms. Accordingly, table II offers
a general overview rather than a definitive judgment on the
suitability of each technique for every situation.
Overall, analyzing the results from Table II, we can observe
some high level trends, distributed techniques like FL and split
learning exhibit computational efficiency due to their inherent
distributed nature, reducing the load on individual devices. In
contrast, we observe differences in memory footprint, with FL
performing poorly due to its requirement for loading the entire
model on each device, whereas split learning only requires
loading a portion of the model. However, split learning is less
efficient in terms of bandwidth usage and training time, as
it necessitates frequent transmission of output from different
splits. Similarly, gossip learning’s decentralized nature makes
it less optimal for bandwidth usage, whereas swarm learning
offers advantages in overcoming communication bottlenecks,
reducing bandwidth usage. In terms of performance, FL often
yields lower results than centralized alternatives, although this
is not universally true across all approaches. It is worth noting
that even when two techniques meet a requirement, they may
not do so with the same level of efficiency. For instance,
both FL and split learning meet the computational efficiency
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST XXXX
12
TABLE II
COMPARISON BETWEEN THE DIFFERENT TECHNIQUES THAT ENABLE EDGE LEARNING
Technique
Computation
Efficiency
Memory
footprint
Low energy
consumption
Fast Training
time
Optimized
Bandwidth
High
Performance
Federated Learning
✓
✗
✓
✓
•
✗
Split Learning
✓
✓
✓
✗
✗
\
Swarm Learning
✓
\
\
\
✓
\
Gossip Learning
✓
✗
✗
\
✗
\
Transfer Learning
•
✗
•
•
✓
✓
Incremental Learning
•
✗
•
•
✓
✓
Meta-Learning
•
✗
•
•
✓
✓
Knowledge Distillation
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✗
Quantization
✓
✓
•
✓
✓
✗
Model Pruning
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✗
BNNs
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✗
SNNs
✓
\
✓
\
\
✗
Forward-Forward Algorithm
✓
✓
✓
✓
\
\
✓: Have a positive effect on the requirement;
✗: Have a negative effect on the requirement;
•: Have a neutral or uncertain effect based on specific conditions on the requirement;
\: There is not enough information and literature to estimate the effect on the requirement
requirement, but split learning may offer greater efficiency,
particularly when dealing with large models. Transfer learning,
incremental learning, and meta-learning have all characteristics
in common. Although they do not optimize for memory, as
the model typically needs to be fully loaded for training, they
often result in improved performance and reduced bandwidth
usage compared to distributed methods. However, their impact
on other requirements is generally less clear. Some approaches
significantly optimize for these measures, while others don’t.
Finally, model compression techniques inherently optimize for
memory, computation, and energy requirements by reducing
model complexity. As a result, they also reduce bandwidth
usage compared to non-compressed models, simply by de-
creasing the model size. However, these methods often result
in decreased performance.
To conclude with the analysis of Table II and Figures 3
and 4. Despite some drawbacks, FL has established itself as a
cornerstone technique for edge learning, with successful adap-
tations across various domains and tasks. Moreover, combining
FL with other techniques or specific implementations can
mitigate its performance limitations and reduce memory and
bandwidth usage. On the other hand, split learning shows great
potential when combined with FL and is particularly promising
for larger models, and we anticipate further advancements in
this area. In contrast, adaptive and fine-tuning-based tech-
niques are often a great choice when cloud pretraining is
possible, reducing the amount of training needed on the edge,
enabling further model personalization, and showing great
potential when combined with distributed techniques. Model
compression techniques are well-suited for edge devices, as
they reduce model size, thereby decreasing computational,
memory, and energy consumption. However, this often comes
at the cost of decreased performance. Ultimately, each tech-
nique has its strengths, and the choice of technique should be
based on the specific task and constraints at hand. Furthermore,
combining multiple techniques can be beneficial, as it allows
leveraging their individual strengths.
IV. EDGE LEARNING FOR DIFFERENT TYPES OF MACHINE
LEARNING
In this section, we will explore the usage of different types
of ML in the edge. We will focus on unsupervised learning,
reinforcement learning, semi-supervised and self-supervised
learning, as they present some particularities when adapted to
the edge, however, we will ignore supervised learning [227]
as it’s usually considered the default when it comes to model
training and most approaches at the edge use it without
requiring any adaptation or particular implementation.
A. Unsupervised Learning
Considering the vast amount of unlabeled data produced
in edge and end devices [45], it is very promising to use
unlabeled data to train ML models on the edge. However,
unsupervised learning comes with multiple challenges and
restrictions for edge learning, especially when it comes to
collaborative learning techniques such as FL or split learning,
which represent the vast majority of techniques used in the
edge (see Figure 3). Unsupervised learning datasets may have
a non-IID nature. Each node in a collaborative setting might
have a different subset of the data, and the data distribution
might vary across nodes. This non-IID property can make
it difficult to effectively combine information from different
nodes. Additionally, in the case of clustering algorithms,
clusters may have varying sizes across nodes in a collaborative
setting and clustering algorithms may need to adapt to changes
in data distribution and cluster structures over time. Finally,
since there are no available labels, and their assignment may
differ between nodes (for example in a clustering algorithm).
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST XXXX
13
On-device
Unsupervised learning
Training
Edge Device
Fig. 5. Unsupervised learning with the training happening only on a single
device, with all the required data hosted locally
Ensuring consistency across distributed nodes is difficult, but
crucial for aggregating meaningful global labels (clusters).
Figures 5, 6 and 7 represent the main different types of
unsupervised learning approaches used for training ML models
in the edge, (a) using unsupervised learning algorithms di-
rectly on-device with non-collaborative methods [48], [228] as
shown in Figure 5; (b) using unsupervised learning methods to
assist in the training of collaborative learning approaches, such
as clustered federated learning [83], [229], [230] highlighted
in Figure 6; and (c) training an unsupervised learning model
on the edge collaboratively such as federated clustering [231]
in Figure 7.
a) Unsupervised learning on a single edge device:
Having an unsupervised learning model trained on a single
edge device is possible if the device has enough computation
power and/or the learning algorithm is lightweight and can
be trained with low resources, the training with such models
is usually no different from the training on the cloud or
other devices, the only difference being the constraint of low
resources and data available [48]. Examples of unsupervised
learning algorithms trained with this approach include [47]
which investigates the application of K-Means on mainstream
controllers, and [232] that presents the first dedicated Cycle-
GAN accelerator for energy-constrained mobile applications,
achieving a higher throughput-to-area ratio and higher energy
efficiency than a GPU. In [228], an unsupervised segmentation
was proposed that can be executed on edge devices without
the need of annotated data. While [233], proposes TMNet,
an approach to solve unsupervised video object segmentation
problem at the edge. Finally, [234] proposes an FPGA based
architecture for a self-organization neural network capable of
performing unsupervised learning on input features from a
CNN by dynamically growing neurons and connections in
order to perform class-incremental lifelong learning for object
classification in the edge.
b) Unsupervised learning to assist collaborative learning
approaches: Collaborative learning approaches, such as FL,
are promising solutions for training ML models on edge
devices. However, FL, the most popular technique on edge
devices, faces multiple challenges, including non-IID data,
uneven computing power [118] and suboptimal results when
the local clients’ data distributions diverge [83]. To address
these issues, the usage of clustering alongside FL have been
proposed multiple times to cluster devices with similar en-
vironmental data distributions [235]. One popular approach
The cloud
aggregation server
performs a client
clustering
Edge Device
Edge Device
Edge Device
Edge Device
Cluster 1
Cluster 2
Model parameters
Model parameters
The edge devices train an ML model 
on a specific task unrelated to the 
clustering done in the cloud
Fig. 6. Unsupervised learning to assist collaborative learning, a clustering is
typically applied to edge devices to improve on the FL process (For example
CFL)
Cloud Aggregation
Server
Edge Device
Edge Device
Edge Device
Edge Device
Fig. 7. Collaborative unsupervised learning, the goal being to apply unsuper-
vised learning algorithms on completely distributed data
is Clustered Federated Learning (CFL) [83], which exploits
geometric properties of the FL loss surface and group the client
into clusters with jointly trainable data distributions. CFL has
been widely adopted and has inspired other approaches, such
as [118], [229], [230], [236]. Alternative approaches include
hierarchical over-the-air FL [237], which utilizes intermedi-
ary servers to form clusters near mobile users, and HPFL-
CN [235], a communication-efficient hierarchical personalized
FL framework that uses complex network feature clustering to
group edge servers with similar environmental data distribu-
tions. Subsequently, personalized models are trained for each
cluster using a hierarchical architecture, resulting in enhanced
efficiency. HPFL-CN incorporates privacy-preserving feature
clustering to derive low-dimensional feature representations
for each edge server. This is achieved by mapping the environ-
mental data onto various complex network domains, thereby
accurately clustering edge servers with similar characteristics.
Finally, [70] uses unsupervised learning methods on the edge
to distinguish between classes across different users, when new
classes with completely unseen data distributions emerge on
devices in an FL setting for audio classification.
c) Collaborative Unsupervised learning at the edge:
Collaborative unsupervised learning methods are challenging
to train for all the reason explained previously. Nevertheless,
several methodologies have surfaced. Among them is federated
clustering, which aim to execute clustering on distributed
data without sharing the data [231], [238], [239]. Federated
clustering methods can be described as one-shot if they
require only one round of transfer between clients and the
servers [231], [240], or they can require multiple round of
communication [241]. An alternative methodology, known as
FedUReID, has been proposed by Zhuang et al. [242] as a
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST XXXX
14
person Re-identification system without the use of any labels,
all the while ensuring the preservation of privacy. Finally,
federation of unsupervised learning [243] proposes a method
where unlabeled data undergo a transformation process to
become surrogate labelled data for each client. Following
this, a modified model is trained through supervised FL.
Eventually, the desired model is obtained by recovering it from
the modified model.
B. Reinforcement learning
Reinforcement learning (RL) has been successfully applied
in the past on different problems in areas such as robotics,
recommendation systems, video games and automatic vehi-
cles [244], [245], making RL a promising and interesting
direction for edge learning. However, The training of RL
models in resources constrained environments is often limited
by high compute and memory requirements from gradient
computations [246], making the application of RL in the
context of edge learning challenging. Despite these challenges,
multiple RL approaches have been proposed for training ML
models in the edge. Among them, federated RL [247], [248]
is a promising approach that allow multiple RL agents to
learn optimal control policies for a series of devices with
slightly different dynamics [249]. Furthermore, it is employed
to achieve diverse objectives including personalization [250],
[251], IoT traffic management [252], [253], Autonomous Sys-
tems [249] and resource allocation for unmanned aerial vehicle
(UAV) [254]. FedMC [103] integrates RL models trained
by multiple edge devices into a general model based on a
meta-learning approach. FedGPO is an RL-based aggregation
technique for FL introduced in [67], and aims to optimize
the energy-efficiency of FL while guaranteeing model conver-
gence. On the other hand, [255] introduces DDQN-Trust, a
trust-based double deep Q-learning-based selection algorithm
for FL that takes into account the trust scores and energy levels
of the IoT devices to make appropriate scheduling decisions
and integrate it with the main FL aggregation techniques
(FedAvg, FedProx, FedShare and FedSGD). Other federated
RL methods include [79], [256]–[260].
Other RL approaches that don’t rely on FL or other
collaborative learning paradigms have been proposed, such
as [261] which uses online sequential learning to achieve
full on-device RL on an FPGA platform. In [262], a method
combining supervised and reinforcement learning is proposed
for adaptive video streaming on edge servers or on-device,
and [263] introduces an on-device RL-based adaptive video
transmission algorithm to predict heterogeneous network band-
width. Finally, RL has also been employed in edge learning
via shielding techniques [264], as proposed in [265] with a
multiagent system that enables each edge node to schedule its
own jobs using SROLE, a shielded RL technique used to check
for action collisions that may occur because of the absence
of coordination between the nodes, and provides alternative
actions to avoid them.
C. Semi-supervised learning
Semi-supervised learning, is a paradigm that combines
labeled and unlabeled data for specific learning tasks [266].
It can be described as a middle ground between supervised
and unsupervised learning, and leverages the advantages of
both approaches. By combining a small amount of labeled
with a large amount of unlabeled data. This is particularly
beneficial in an edge learning context, where vast amounts of
unlabeled data are generated continuously by end devices [45],
and where sending the data for labeling in the cloud is not
always possible for privacy reasons. For a comprehensive
overview of semi-supervised learning, refer to the following
survey [266]. Semi-supervised learning presents an alternative
mean to harness the vast amount of unlabeled data at the edge.
Additionally, it offers other advantage on the edge, as training
datasets are often incomplete before training and might need
supplementation with real-time data [267]. Various method-
ologies have been developed to adapt semi-supervised learning
to edge environments, including FL based approaches [268],
[269], as well as other learning techniques [223], [267], [267],
[270]–[274].
D. Self-supervised learning
Self-supervised learning is an ML approach that allows
models to learn from vast amounts of data without explicit
labels [275]. It creates labels from the data itself by defining
pretext tasks where the data provides its own supervision. For
instance, in natural language processing, a common pretext
task involve predicting the context surrounding a word or
predicting a given word in a sentence given the previous
word, also known as language modeling. In computer vision,
a pretext task might involve predicting masked patches of an
image. Self-supervised learning can be especially beneficial
in domains where labelled data is scarce, or the specific task
can not be known a priori [275]. For a deeper exploration on
self-supervised learning we refer the reader to [275].
Because of its independence from labeled data, self-
supervised learning is considered as a promising approach
for edge learning. By learning from data without explicit
labels, it enables learning useful representations and skills
that can be fine-tuned for specific tasks, such as recommen-
dation systems [160], [168], speech and audio-related appli-
cations [276], [277], and others [278]–[281]. Moreover, self-
supervised learning can be particularly effective in scenarios
with data and concept drifting [278]. Several recent studies
have proposed innovative self-supervised learning methods
tailored for edge devices, such as contrastive learning [278],
[280], [281].
V. EDGE LEARNING USE CASES AND APPLICATIONS
As explained in previous sections, edge learning offer
multiple advantages that range from low latency, bandwidth
efficiency to privacy preservation and improved reliability and
robustness, it also allows more customization and personal-
ization by adapting to user preferences and behavior without
relying on centralized computing or needing to collect and
store private user data in cloud servers. In this section, we
explore some uses cases and applications for edge learning
that have been researched and developed in the past years.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST XXXX
15
A. Healthcare and Remote Monitoring
The use of ML in healthcare has been under constant
improvement over the last years [282]. However, cloud-based
ML solutions still struggle to meet the sector’s stringent
security requirements [283], address privacy concerns [284],
and satisfy low latency requirements [285]. Edge learning has
emerged as a promising solution to address these challenges,
gaining traction in the field, mostly by using federated edge
learning [51], [286]–[288]. However, while FL in healthcare
is increasingly explored as a privacy-preserving approach, the
training of these models is often done with large resource
requirements [289], [290], making it hard to implement on
edge devices. Moreover, for various tasks, medical data is
collected and managed directly by large organizations such as
hospitals and medical facilities [291]. For such tasks FL with
more powerful clients with access GPUs may be preferred,
since the privacy constraints in these scenarios often involves
data not being shared outside the organization rather than the
local device. Nevertheless, for tasks where the data shouldn’t
leave medical edge devices and wearables, such as sensors and
ECG devices, edge learning remains a viable and promising
direction [292], [293]. Researches that use edge learning for
healthcare span in most of the field, from atrial fibrillation
recognition [294], preterm labor risk prediction [295], car-
diac disease detection [170], breast ultrasound image classi-
fication [272] to dermatological disease [281] and COVID-
19 diagnosis, leveraging techniques such as CFL [286] and
federated transfer learning [296]. For a more comprehensive
overview of FL and edge learning in healthcare, refer to the
survey [289].
When it comes to monitoring for medical purposes, Human
Activity Recognition (HAR) represents one of the most popu-
lar use cases. HAR refers to the automation of the identifica-
tion and categorization of the various activities performed by
humans and their interactions with the environment [297]. As
personalization for HAR has been shown to improve the results
and performance of these systems [298], training the model
on the edge using incremental learning or meta learning ap-
proaches can help achieve that while increasing the privacy and
reducing the bandwidth consumption. PILOTE [136] proposes
an incremental learning-based approach for HAR, designed for
edge devices with extremely limited resources and demon-
strates reliable performance in mitigating catastrophic forget-
ting. In addition, [299] proposes a personalizable lightweight
CNN model for HAR, as well as a training algorithm to
find personalization-friendly parameters. With the objective
of improving the accuracy after the personalization when
dealing with a wide range of target users. ClusterFL [300],
proposes a clustering-based FL approach for edge-based HAR.
Finally, [301] presents an on-device deep learning approach for
STM32 microcontrollers, which fine-tunes a CNN model for
enhanced HAR personalization.
B. Smart Technologies
Edge learning has emerged as a pivotal technological ad-
vancement for smart technologies such as smart cities [302],
smart agriculture [303], smart homes [304], etc. In this section,
we will explore some of its applications in these settings.
Smart cities are urban ecosystems designed using IoT
technologies to solve urban life problems and improve the
residents’ quality of life [305]. In this context, edge learning
has been proposed to solve different challenges, mainly for its
ability to leverage ML capabilities while preserving network
bandwidth and reducing the charge on cloud servers. In [306],
a cloud-aided edge learning based on knowledge fusion for
smart lighting system has been proposed. Another application
of ML in the edge is in smart grid systems where ML is
needed to improve demand forecasting and automated demand
response, as well as to analyze data related to energy use
and obtain energy consumption patterns [307], detect anoma-
lies [308], improve communications [309] and security [310]
in the system. Other applications in smart cities include
the detection of abnormal and dangerous activities [311],
[312], pedestrian detection [313], water consumption fore-
casting [58], [314] and reducing congestions in intelligent
traffic systems [315], [316]. Other more general edge learning
approaches for smart cities include [269], [302], [317]–[319].
Smart farming is another domain where ML is increasingly
used to enhance the production quality, crop selection, and
mineral deficiency detection, as well as to increase farmers’
earnings [320]. In [303] a TinyML based framework using
deep neural networks and LSTM models for unmanned aerial
vehicles assisted smart farming was proposed, which measure
soil moisture and ambient environmental conditions. Smart
farming remains a promising domain for edge learning, al-
though further research is needed for effectively harnessing
its potential. Finally, using edge learning in smart homes can
also be promising, however, at the time of writing this article,
only a few papers explore this area, including [304].
C. Autonomous vehicles
Autonomous vehicles are vehicles that can operate with-
out human intervention, they utilize sensor technologies, AI,
and networking to navigate and make decisions [321]. Au-
tonomous vehicles include self-driving cars, trucks, buses,
drones, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), and even small
robots. As demonstrated in [322] offloading deep learning
tasks to edge devices or servers can improve the inference
accuracy while meeting the latency constraint, which makes
edge learning perfectly suitable for this use-cases, and as
expected there has been extensive research done in this area.
UAVs are by far the most prominent use of edge learning
for autonomous vehicles. In [323], a synchronous FL structure
for multi-UAVs was proposed, that aims to resolve device
privacy concerns that come from sending raw data to UAV
servers, as well as UAVs’ limited processing or communication
resources. On the other hand, [324] propose a model-aided
federated MARL algorithm to coordinate multiple UAVs on
data harvesting missions with limited knowledge about the
environment, significantly reducing the real-world training
data demand. As mentioned previously in Section V-B, [303]
aims to assist farming operations using UAVs that measure
soil moisture and ambient environmental conditions and [325]
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST XXXX
16
proposes a model to derive computation specifications for
learning-based visual odometry from physical characteristics
of UAVs. Other edge learning applications for UAVs in-
clude [254], [325]–[333]
Edge learning based approaches for other autonomous
vehicles are also constantly explored and involve multiple
applications, they include:
• Trajectory predictions such as [334] that proposes a
solution for trajectory prediction in the edge for both
human-driven and autonomous vehicles by leveraging the
capabilities of the 5G multi-access edge computing plat-
form to collect and process measurements from vehicles
and road infrastructure in edge servers and use an LSTM
model to predict the vehicle trajectory with high accuracy.
• Energy efficiency for autonomous vehicles, where [335]
proposes a rate-splitting multiple access (RSMA)-based
Internet of Vehicles system for energy-efficient FL in
autonomous driving, using non-orthogonal unicasting and
multicasting transmission.
D. Recommendation systems and personalization
Recommender systems are intelligent applications that assist
users in making decisions by providing advice on products
or services they might be interested in [336]. However, rec-
ommender systems that utilize user data can pose threats
to user privacy, such as the inadvertent leakage of data to
untrusted parties or other users [337]. Furthermore, privacy-
enhancing techniques may lead to decreased accuracy in the
recommendations [338]. Edge learning, and especially collab-
orative learning approaches such as FL, have a big potential
in solving these problems by allowing recommender models
to be partially or completely trained on the edge, keeping
user interactions on the device and using them to further
personalize the system [339].
Different approaches using FL have been used for rec-
ommendation systems. Amongst them, FedFast [340] pro-
pose to accelerate distributed learning for deep federated
recommendation models which achieve high accuracy early
in the training process. In [341], a Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) used alongside FL for social recommendation tasks,
a method that aims to alleviate the cold start problem by
inducing information of social links between users [341]. On
the other hand, [342] was proposed as a federated sequential
recommender system for the edge. A method that, unlike tra-
ditional recommendations, provides personalized suggestions
by sequentially analyzing users’ historical interactions [343].
To achieve this, [342] uses a knowledge-aware transformer
and proposed to incorporate knowledge graph information
into sequential recommendation tasks, while applying FL to
preserve users’ privacy, and use replaced token detection and
two-stream self-attention strategies to enhance the transformer-
based model. Finally, FedCT [133] aims to harness cross-
domain recommendation in the edge. While cross-domain
recommendation [344] is a promising area for utilizing data
from multiple domains, the conventional approach of sharing
data between services in a cloud setting often proves im-
practical or impossible due to privacy and security concerns.
This limitation emphasizes the appeal of edge learning as
an interesting direction for cross-domain recommendation.
By enabling the training of recommender systems on multi-
domain data residing on edge devices, while still respecting
users’ privacy.
Despite the improvement of federated recommender sys-
tems for users’ privacy preservation [345], [346], distributed
learning approaches for recommendation still face privacy
challenges. Specifically, although users’ item ratings remain
on-device, they can be inferred from the final model, thereby
posing a risk of data leakage when the model is shared with
multiple users [347], [348]. To address this concern, noise is
often introduced to the ratings in the form of random user-
item interactions. However, this approach usually results in
lower performances [348]. In recent years, several solutions
have emerged to mitigate this issue. For instance, FedMMF
a federated masked matrix factorization, introduced in [347],
aims to protect data privacy in federated recommender systems
by using personalized mask generated only from local data.
Another approach that aims to achieve that is FedRec++ [348],
by allocating certain clients as denoising clients to eliminate
noise while respecting privacy, thereby counteracting the ran-
dom sampling of items during the training phase. Other FL
based edge recommendation systems includes [345], [346],
[349]–[351]
Although the most popular approach, FL isn’t the only
method to train recommender systems in the edge. In [198], an
on-device deep learning sequential recommendation method
aimed at mobile devices was proposed, by fine-tuning a
pretrained model that was trained using data collected before
GDPR3, for further personalization. And [160] focus on on-
device next-item recommendation, and uses compact models
and a self-supervised knowledge distillation framework to
compensate for the capacity loss caused by compression.
Finally, [352] proposes a split-FL method called SpFedRec
where a split learning approach was proposed to migrate
the item model from participant’s edge devices to the cloud
side and compress item data while transmitting and apply a
Squeeze-and-Excitation network mechanism on the backbone
model to optimize the perception of dominant features.
Personalized crowdsourced livecast are another part of per-
sonalization methods that might benefit from being offloaded
to the edge. In [353] the rapid development of crowdsourced
livecast and the challenges in providing personalized quality of
experience to viewers is discussed, and it introduces an intel-
ligent edge-learning-based framework called ELCast, which
integrates CNNs and deep RL models in edge computing
architectures for personalized crowdcast recommendation. In
the area related to video games, personalization involves con-
structing a system capable of adapting video game rules and
content to better suit some aspect of the player preferences,
personality, experience and performances [354]. Although not
yet explored in edge and on-device learning, [355] propose a
Deep Q network model to personalize games based on user-
interaction on the edge.
3GDPR: The General Data Protection Regulation is a regulation on data
privacy in the European Union and the European Economic Area
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST XXXX
17
E. Others
There are multiple other applications and use cases of
edge learning that we couldn’t explore in this section, from
keyword spotting [163], [356], spam detection [56], [57], IoT
threats prediction [55], camera trap images classification [357],
detecting defects in photovoltaic components [358], estimat-
ing air quality [359], to face spoof attack detection [360]
and speech recognition [93]–[95], [144], [361]–[363], another
interesting potential application explored in [364] is the use
of edge learning in lunar analogue environments for future
space missions. In general, any use case that benefits from
personalization on private user data, or suffers from bandwidth
limitations or privacy risks in the training might benefit from
fully or partially using edge learning. Therefore, we expect the
trend of edge learning to continue rising, expend into other
fields and areas and grow beyond the current use cases and
applications in both academia and the industry.
VI. LIBRARIES, SIMULATORS AND TOOLS FOR EDGE
LEARNING
As an emergent field, edge learning requires multiples
tools to facilitate its usability, integration and implementation,
ranging from emulators and simulators, used train and test
ML models on cloud servers before training on the edge, to
libraries that allows the successful training of ML models on
edge devices.
Although there has been significant work on creating li-
braries and frameworks for ML at the edge, most of these
libraries focus on the deployment and inference of deep
learning on edge devices [365]. Only a few libraries enable the
training of ML models on edge devices. These include ONNX
Runtime4, TensorFlow Lite5 or libraries that focus on dis-
tributed learning tasks such as Flower [366] or FedML [367].
Some tools, only allow for researching, prototyping and ex-
perimenting of FL methods and are designed for simulating
FL methods on the cloud. While others allow for the training
and deployment of these techniques in edge devices. Table II
shows a list of frameworks intended for edge learning, or for
running training simulations for edge learning.
PyTorch [380] and TensorFlow [381], the most popular
frameworks for training deep learning models, have both
developed edge ML libraries. However, while TensorFlow lite,
allows for both the inference and training on the edge, PyTorch
mobile6 and ExecuTorch7, Edge ML libraries for PyTorch at
the edge, only support inference at the time of writing. Note
that PyTorch models can be trained using ONNX Runtime8.
ONNX Runtime is a cross-platform ML accelerator with
on-device training capabilities. It has deep integration with
PyTorch, Hugging Face9 and TensorFlow, enabling accelerated
training and inference on multiple platforms, including mobile
4https://cloudblogs.microsoft.com/opensource/2023/05/31/
on-device-training-efficient-training-on-the-edge-with-onnx-runtime/
5https://blog.tensorflow.org/2021/11/on-device-training-in-tensorflow-lite.
html
6https://pytorch.org/mobile/home/
7https://pytorch.org/blog/pytorch-edge/
8https://onnxruntime.ai/blogs/pytorch-on-the-edge
9https://huggingface.co/blog/optimum-onnxruntime-training
devices (Android, iOS) and various hardware accelerators
and programming languages. Additionally, ONNX Runtime
supports FL on edge devices through its on-device training
capabilities.
Over the years, multiple tools and libraries have been
proposed to train FL algorithms on edge devices, driven by
the need for efficient and decentralized learning. As mentioned
earlier, these tools can be categorized into two types. Those
that only allow simulation of an edge learning environment in
the cloud, and those that allow training on edge devices.
a) Simulation only FL tools: Simulation tools are ex-
tremely important in the context of edge computing. They are
used to model the behavior of fog/edge infrastructures, allow-
ing for the study of interoperability across different layers and
protocols in edge-cloud environments [382]. In edge learning,
simulators enable experimentation with ML models on cloud
servers, facilitating rapid prototyping and experimentation.
Many edge learning simulators focus on FL. Notable examples
include FL PyTorch [377] a PyTorch-based simulation tool for
FL, and TensorFlow Federated10 a similar tool for TensorFlow.
Other notable FL simulators are: LEAF [372]; FedJax [371]
a JAX-based open source library; Flute [373] an open source
platform with multiple optimization, privacy, and communica-
tion strategies; And finally FedLab [370] a lightweight open-
source framework that focus on algorithm effectiveness and
communication efficiency, and allows customization on server
optimization, client optimization, communication agreement,
and communication compression.
b) FL Simulation tools, which allow the training on
an edge device: In recent years, numerous libraries have
emerged to support the experimentation, development, and
deployment of FL algorithms on edge devices. These libraries
enable researchers to develop and test FL algorithms on the
cloud while facilitating the transition from simulation to real-
world deployment on the edge. Notable examples include
Flower [366], and FedML [367] which are both aimed toward
the research and experimentation of FL algorithms, while
allowing the execution of the algorithms on a variety of edge
devices. PySyft [368] is another FL open-source library that
was built as an extension of PyTorch, Keras, and TensorFlow,
and can be run on mobile devices using KotlinSyft11 for
Android and SwiftSyft12 for iOS. FedERA [369] is a similar
library that includes a verification module to ensure the
validation of local models and avoid aggregating malicious
ones. Additionally, FedERA features a carbon emission tracker
module to accurately estimate CO2 emissions during the local
parameter update phase.
c) Other non-FL Frameworks for edge learning: Edge
learning frameworks and libraries have been proposed to
target specific platforms or hardware. These frameworks aim
to simplify the training of ML models on various devices.
Notable examples include CoreML, a Swift-based ML infer-
ence and training framework for iOS, designed to simplify
10https://www.tensorflow.org/federated
11KotlinSyft: Syft worker for secure on-device machine learning for An-
droid https://github.com/OpenMined/KotlinSyft
12SwiftSyft: Syft worker for secure on-device machine learning for iOS
https://github.com/OpenMined/SwiftSyft
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST XXXX
18
TABLE III
COMPARISON BETWEEN THE DIFFERENT FRAMEWORKS FOR EDGE LEARNING
Framework Name
Support simulation
Allow training on
edge device
Type
Language
Plateform
TensorFlow lite
✗
✓
Deep Learning
Python
Android / iOS
ONNX Runtime
✗
✓
Deep Learning / ML
Multiple Languages
Android / iOS / Other
Plateforms
Flower [366]
✓
✓
FL
Python
Android / iOS
FedML [367]
✓
✓
FL
Python
Android / iOS
PySyft [368]
✓
✓
FL
Python, Kotlin, Swift
Android / iOS
FedERA [369]
✓
✓
FL
Python, Kotlin, Swift
Android / iOS
FedLab [370]
✓
✗
FL
Python
-
FedJax [371]
✓
✗
FL
Python, Jax
-
LEAF [372]
✓
✗
FL
Python
-
Flute [373]
✓
✗
FL
Python
-
PyVertical [374]
✓
✗
FL / Split Learning
Python
-
OpenFL [375]
✓
✗
FL
Python
-
EasyFL [376]
✓
✗
FL
Python
-
FL PyTorch [377]
✓
✗
FL
Python
-
TensorFlow Federated
✓
✗
FL
Python
-
CoreML
✗
✓
ML
Python
iOS
EdgeRL [378]
✗
✓
RL
C/C++
Embedded Platforms
PULP-TrainLib [379]
✗
✓
Deep Learning
C
RISC-V Multi-core
MCUs
ML model deployment and training on iOS devices. PULP-
TrainLib [379] is another framework, proposed for on-device
training on RISC-V multi-core microcontrollers. Additionally,
EdgeRL [378] is a lightweight C/C++ framework for on-
device reinforcement learning, designed to run on single-
core processors typically found in resource-limited embedded
platforms.
VII. OPEN ISSUES, RESEARCH DIRECTIONS AND FUTURE
TRENDS
In this section, we dive into the challenges, emerging
research paths, and future trends in edge learning. To provide
a comprehensive overview, we will divide this section into
two parts. The first part will examine the open issues and
existing challenges in edge learning, highlighting the obstacles
that need to be addressed. The second part will explore
promising research directions and our predictions for future
trends, shedding light on the opportunities and possibilities
that lie ahead.
A. Challenges and open issues
1) Resource constraints: As highlighted in previous parts
of this survey, the resource constraints inherent to edge devices
pose the biggest challenge for edge learning. In Section III we
explored the different approaches designed to optimize and
accelerate the training of ML models on the edge. However,
despite current efforts, limitations in computation, memory,
and sometimes energy continue to impede the training of the
largest and most complex ML models on the edge. As recent
tasks and use cases demand bigger and more complex ML
models, the resource limitations of edge devices still pose a
significant challenge and remain an open issue. Consequently,
ongoing research efforts focus on optimizing ML models for
resource constrained environments. Another promising idea,
not explored in this survey, involves optimizing edge device
hardware for ML [383]–[385].
2) Challenges in detecting data quality issues in the edge:
Ensuring data quality is a crucial aspect of training ML
models [386], [387]. However, this has proven challenging in
the context of edge learning. Due to the decentralized nature
of storage inherent in edge computing, detecting data quality
issues such as missing or incorrect labels and noisy data is
difficult. Additionally, edge devices can be prone to hardware
failures, leading to missing or corrupted data [388], [389]. As
such, data quality for ML on the edge remains an ongoing
challenge [390], necessitating further research into developing
new methods for detecting and fixing data quality issues, as
well as designing ML models that are robust to these issues.
The survey [390] explores the different challenges, constraints,
potential solutions, and ongoing efforts related to data quality
for ML on the edge.
3) Lack of labelled data availability: In the context of
edge learning, a prominent challenge arises from the preva-
lence of unlabeled data on edge devices. This issue becomes
particularly problematic as the majority of ML applications
traditionally emphasize supervised learning paradigms, neces-
sitating labeled datasets for effective training [45]. To address
this challenge, it is imperative to explore no-label or few-
label solutions. This includes a focus on unsupervised (Sec-
tion IV-A), self-supervised (Section IV-D), or semi-supervised
(Section IV-C) techniques as well as methods that can make
the most of limited labeled instances such as few-shot learning.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST XXXX
19
Moreover, the development of auto-labeling systems, exem-
plified by solutions like Flame [391], emerges as a promising
solution to mitigate the impact of the labeled data scarcity on
the edge.
4) Abundance of non-iid data on the edge: As described
in Section III-A, distributed learning methods, such as FL,
stand out as pivotal techniques in edge learning. However,
a significant body of literature on FL is done under the
assumption of IID data [392], and very often this assump-
tion doesn’t reflect the data present on edge devices. While
the effects of Non-IID data on FL depends widely on the
type of FL method employed, it often negatively impact the
training [393]–[395]. And while multiple solutions have been
proposed to handle Non-IID data, they might come at the
expense of privacy preservation and a clear benchmark of real
Non-IID performance is unclear considering the large diversity
in FL methods [393]. More details on the impact of Non-IID
data on FL as well as the specific challenges it poses, and the
different approaches proposed to tackle the issue can be found
on the following surveys [392], [393].
5) Data leakage and privacy concerns: Although edge
learning aims to provide a privacy-aware alternative to tradi-
tional machine learning, it is not immune to privacy and leak-
age risks during or as a result of the training phase. Notably,
model vulnerabilities can be exploited to leak sensitive data,
particularly in FL settings where the model is shared among
clients [396], [397]. This vulnerability is exacerbated when the
model is susceptible to data reconstruction attacks, increasing
the risk of private data leakage [396]. To mitigate these risks,
techniques like differential privacy [100], [101], encryption
methods [398], and other approaches are often employed to
ensure optimal privacy. However, further research is necessary
to guarantee the preservation of private data and minimize
leakage risks in edge learning.
B. Future trends and research directions
1) Hybridization of ML techniques in edge learning: In the
exploration of edge learning techniques detailed in Section III,
various strategies have been employed to optimize the training
of relatively large ML models on edge devices. However, each
of these techniques, as outlined in Table II, comes with distinct
advantages and drawbacks. Recognizing the diversity in these
methodologies, there has been a notable surge in approaches
that advocate for a hybridization of multiple techniques.
Figure 4 illustrates this promising trend, wherein researchers
aim to maximize the advantages and mitigate the drawbacks
of individual techniques by combining them. This emerging
direction, signifies a deliberate effort to create comprehensive
and robust solutions tailored to the unique challenges posed by
edge devices. Given the promising results showcased by such
hybrid approaches, the trajectory indicates a continued surge
in interest and research efforts towards refining and expanding
the applicability of hybridized techniques in the domain of
edge learning.
2) Training large models at the edge: Large models, in-
cluding Large Language Models (LLMs) [399]–[401], Dif-
fusion models [402], and Audio Generation models [403],
[404], etc., are increasingly prevalent and are steadily grow-
ing in popularity. However, despite a growing demand for
personalization of these models [405], [406] and privacy
concerns in collecting and using personal or private data
on centralized cloud servers [407]. The fine-tuning, train-
ing or personalization of such models at the edge is very
challenging considering the limited resources available for
edge devices [408]. Although contributions in this domain are
currently limited, the predicted surge in interest prompts a
need for proactive exploration. Notable approaches, such as
FedLLM13, FwdLLM [85] and FATE-LLM [84], have emerged
using FL to address the challenges of training LLMs at the
edge. Looking ahead, the increasing popularity of LLMs and
diffusion models anticipates a growing interest in adapting
them for edge learning. Furthermore, innovative techniques
such as LoRa [409] and Fnet [410] offer potential solutions
for the resource constraints on edge devices, especially when
integrated with complementary approaches like FL III-A1,
split learning III-A2, or model compression techniques III-C.
The convergence of these methodologies holds promise for
overcoming challenges associated with training large models
at the edge in the foreseeable future.
3) Extension to privacy preserving applications: The es-
calating popularity of ML applications has brought forth
heightened concerns regarding the vast amounts of private and
personal data required for effective model training, raising
questions about various legal and ethical implications. As
discussed in earlier sections, edge learning emerges as a
potential solution to address these privacy concerns, as it
enables the training of ML models directly on the edge device,
eliminating the need for sensitive data to traverse external
networks. As such, the usage of edge learning for privacy-
preserving applications is expected to be a pivotal research
direction for the field. Domains like healthcare (V-A) often
had legal requirements as well as ethical concerns of using
the data for training ML model [411]. And as explored in
discussed in previous sections (V-D), recommendation systems
also stand out as a promising avenue for exploration because
the significant scrutiny faced for their reliance on private
data during model training [337], [338]. Additionally, other
applications that require model personalization and tuning
on private data ranging from spam detection in SMS and
emails to word suggestions in keyboards and personal assistant
chatbots or HAR, can benefit from edge learning, fostering a
paradigm shift towards more ethical and privacy-conscious ML
applications.
4) Reducing energy consumption and carbon footprint: The
recent surge in distributed learning methodologies has raised
concerns regarding their environmental impact. The substantial
energy requirements for training models and data transfer
to/from centralized data centers contribute to a significant
carbon footprint [412], [413]. Recent trends in ML underscore
the critical need to estimate and minimize the environmental
impact from the training processes. According to [414], the
estimated carbon footprint associated with edge devices by
13FedLLM is a platform to Build Large Language Models on Proprietary
Data using FL using the FedML Platform https://doc.fedml.ai/federate/fedllm
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST XXXX
20
2027 will be between 22 and 562 MtCO2-eq/year. Therefore,
as a pressing research direction, there is a growing emphasis on
developing techniques for edge learning that consider energy
efficiency. Pioneering works, such as [415], have initiated
analyses to quantify the environmental impact of ML in edge
devices. Notably, frameworks like FedERA [369], designed for
training FL models at the edge, incorporate a dedicated carbon
emission tracker module to precisely estimate CO2 emissions
during the local parameter update phase.
5) Frameworks to implement training: Despite the prolif-
eration of frameworks and libraries aimed at enabling ML
on edge devices, the current landscape lacks robust support
for on-device training. Existing tools, such as PyTorch Mo-
bile and ExecuTorch, predominantly emphasize inference on
mobile/edge devices, neglecting the essential backpropagation
algorithms crucial for the training phase. This imbalance in
focus between training and inference highlights a critical gap
in the current ecosystem. Although some tools have been
proposed to facilitate on-device training on the edge (see
Section VI), there is a pressing need for the development of
new libraries, frameworks, and tools explicitly designed for
edge learning.
VIII. CONCLUSION
This survey aims to provide a comprehensive overview
of the vast field of edge learning, which involves training
and fine-tuning of ML models at the edge. We have defined
edge learning and its associated metrics and requirements, and
explored various techniques and methodologies for optimizing
ML training at the edge. Additionally, we explored the grow-
ing integration of ML types such as unsupervised learning,
reinforcement learning, etc. and the different applications and
use cases of edge learning. We have also examined the tools,
libraries and frameworks used for edge learning. Furthermore,
we have identified key challenges in edge learning and at-
tempted to predict future trends and research directions.
Our analysis has revealed that distributed learning methods,
including Federated Learning (FL), are gaining popularity for
edge training. We have assessed the benefits and drawbacks
of various techniques used to optimize the training at the edge
and presented them in Section III-E2 and Table II. We con-
cluded that distributed techniques such as FL and split learning
shows great potential for democratizing edge learning. On the
other hand, adaptive and fine-tuning based technique should
be considered when possible as they often greatly improve the
performances or reduce the training time on the edge signifi-
cantly. Furthermore, model compression techniques are a great
choice when slight decreases in performances are acceptable
for a reduced model size and computational requirements. At
last, we identified a growing trend towards combining different
techniques to mitigate their limitations and maximize their
benefits.
This survey has provided a broad understanding of edge
learning, its requirements, challenges, use cases, and trends,
as well as an overview of principal optimization techniques
and tools. While it does not provide an in-depth evaluation
and comparison of specific task performances, it serves as a
reference for developing a foundational understanding of edge
learning and identifying areas for future research.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research is supported by the Technology Innova-
tion Institute, UAE under the research contract number
TII/DSRC/2022/3143.
REFERENCES
[1] N. Maslej, L. Fattorini, E. Brynjolfsson, J. Etchemendy, K. Ligett,
T. Lyons, J. Manyika, H. Ngo, J. C. Niebles, V. Parli et al., “Artificial
intelligence index report 2023,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03715,
2023.
[2] S. Raschka, Y. H. Liu, and V. Mirjalili, Machine Learning with PyTorch
and Scikit-Learn: Develop machine learning and deep learning models
with Python.
Packt Publishing Ltd, Feb. 2022, google-Books-ID:
SVxaEAAAQBAJ.
[3] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature, vol.
521, no. 7553, pp. 436–444, May 2015, publisher: Nature Publishing
Group.
[4] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning.
MIT
Press, Nov. 2016, google-Books-ID: omivDQAAQBAJ.
[5] M. P. Deisenroth, A. A. Faisal, and C. S. Ong, Mathematics for
Machine Learning.
Cambridge University Press, Apr. 2020, google-
Books-ID: pFjPDwAAQBAJ.
[6] H. G. Abreha, M. Hayajneh, and M. A. Serhani, “Federated Learning in
Edge Computing: A Systematic Survey,” Sensors (Basel, Switzerland),
vol. 22, no. 2, p. 450, January 2022.
[7] P. Boobalan, S. Ramu, Q.-V. Pham, K. Dev, S. Pandya, P. Maddikunta,
T. Gadekallu, and T. Huynh-The, “Fusion of Federated Learning and
Industrial Internet of Things: A survey,” Computer Networks, vol. 212,
2022.
[8] S. Zhu, T. Voigt, J. Ko, and F. Rahimian, “On-device Training: A First
Overview on Existing Systems,” May 2023, arXiv:2212.00824 [cs].
[9] S. Dhar, J. Guo, J. J. Liu, S. Tripathi, U. Kurup, and M. Shah, “A
survey of on-device machine learning: An algorithms and learning
theory perspective,” ACM Trans. Internet Things, vol. 2, no. 3, jul
2021.
[10] A. Tak and S. Cherkaoui, “Federated Edge Learning: Design Issues
and Challenges,” IEEE Network, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 252–258, 2021.
[11] J. Chen and X. Ran, “Deep learning with edge computing: A review,”
Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 107, no. 8, pp. 1655–1674, 2019.
[12] X. Wang, Y. Han, V. C. M. Leung, D. Niyato, X. Yan, and X. Chen,
“Convergence of Edge Computing and Deep Learning: A Comprehen-
sive Survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 22, no. 2,
pp. 869–904, 2020.
[13] Y. Shi, K. Yang, T. Jiang, J. Zhang, and K. B. Letaief, “Communication-
Efficient Edge AI: Algorithms and Systems,” IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 2167–2191, 2020.
[14] D. Xu, T. Li, Y. Li, X. Su, S. Tarkoma, T. Jiang, J. Crowcroft, and
P. Hui, “Edge intelligence: Architectures, challenges, and applications,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.12172, 2020.
[15] W. Y. B. Lim, N. C. Luong, D. T. Hoang, Y. Jiao, Y.-C. Liang,
Q. Yang, D. Niyato, and C. Miao, “Federated Learning in Mobile Edge
Networks: A Comprehensive Survey,” Feb. 2020, arXiv:1909.11875
[cs, eess].
[16] J. L. Leon Veas, L. B. Cordero Solis, G. E. Valverde Landivar,
and M. A. Quiroz Martinez, “Deep learning for edge computing: A
survey,” in Artificial Intelligence, Computer and Software Engineering
Advances.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2021, pp. 79–93.
[17] J. Zhang, Z. Qu, C. Chen, H. Wang, Y. Zhan, B. Ye, and S. Guo, “Edge
Learning: The Enabling Technology for Distributed Big Data Analytics
in the Edge,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 151:1–151:36,
Jul. 2021.
[18] M. G. S. Murshed, C. Murphy, D. Hou, N. Khan, G. Ananthanarayanan,
and F. Hussain, “Machine Learning at the Network Edge: A Survey,”
ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 1–37, November 2022.
[19] P. Joshi, M. Hasanuzzaman, C. Thapa, H. Afli, and T. Scully, “Enabling
all in-edge deep learning: A literature review,” IEEE Access, vol. 11,
pp. 3431–3460, 2023.
[20] H. Cai, J. Lin, Y. Lin, Z. Liu, H. Tang, H. Wang, L. Zhu, and S. Han,
“Enable Deep Learning on Mobile Devices: Methods, Systems, and
Applications,” ACM Transactions on Design Automation of Electronic
Systems, vol. 27, no. 3, 2022.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST XXXX
21
[21] Y. Cui, J. Guo, X. Li, L. Liang, and S. Jin, “Federated edge learning
for the wireless physical layer: Opportunities and challenges,” China
Communications, vol. 19, no. 8, pp. 15–30, August 2022, conference
Name: China Communications.
[22] A. Imteaj, U. Thakker, S. Wang, J. Li, and M. Amini, “A Survey
on Federated Learning for Resource-Constrained IoT Devices,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1–24, 2022.
[23] J. Mendez, K. Bierzynski, M. P. Cu´ellar, and D. P. Morales, “Edge
Intelligence: Concepts, Architectures, Applications, and Future Direc-
tions,” ACM TRANSACTIONS ON EMBEDDED COMPUTING SYS-
TEMS, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 48:1–48:41, Oct. 2022.
[24] C. P. Filho, E. Marques, V. Chang, L. dos Santos, F. Bernardini, P. F.
Pires, L. Ochi, and F. C. Delicato, “A Systematic Literature Review on
Distributed Machine Learning in Edge Computing,” Sensors, vol. 22,
no. 7, p. 2665, Jan. 2022.
[25] P. P. Ray, “A review on TinyML: State-of-the-art and prospects,”
Journal of King Saud University - Computer and Information Sciences,
vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1595–1623, Apr. 2022.
[26] W. Li, H. Hacid, E. Almazrouei, and M. Debbah, “A comprehensive
review and a taxonomy of edge machine learning: Requirements,
paradigms, and techniques,” AI, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 729–786, 2023.
[27] H. Hua, Y. Li, T. Wang, N. Dong, W. Li, and J. Cao, “Edge Computing
with Artificial Intelligence: A Machine Learning Perspective,” ACM
Computing Surveys, vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 184:1–184:35, January 2023.
[28] Z. Wu, S. Sun, Y. Wang, M. Liu, X. Jiang, R. Li, and B. Gao, “Survey
of Knowledge Distillation in Federated Edge Learning,” February 2023,
arXiv:2301.05849 [cs].
[29] K. Hoffpauir, J. Simmons, N. Schmidt, R. Pittala, I. Briggs, S. Makani,
and Y. Jararweh, “A Survey on Edge Intelligence and Lightweight
Machine Learning Support for Future Applications and Services,”
Journal of Data and Information Quality, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 20:1–
20:30, Jun. 2023.
[30] V. Barbuto, C. Savaglio, M. Chen, and G. Fortino, “Disclosing edge
intelligence: A systematic meta-survey,” Big Data and Cognitive Com-
puting, vol. 7, no. 1, 2023.
[31] S. Trindade, L. F. Bittencourt, and N. L. da Fonseca, “Resource
management at the network edge for federated learning,” Digital
Communications and Networks, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 765–782, 2024.
[32] P. Grzesik and D. Mrozek, “Combining Machine Learning and Edge
Computing: Opportunities, Challenges, Platforms, Frameworks, and
Use Cases,” Electronics, vol. 13, no. 3, p. 640, Jan. 2024.
[33] O. Jouini, K. Sethom, A. Namoun, N. Aljohani, M. H. Alanazi, and
M. N. Alanazi, “A survey of machine learning in edge computing:
Techniques, frameworks, applications, issues, and research directions,”
Technologies, vol. 12, no. 6, 2024.
[34] K. Cao, Y. Liu, G. Meng, and Q. Sun, “An overview on edge computing
research,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 85 714–85 728, 2020.
[35] S. Ayyasamy, “Edge computing research–a review,” Journal of Infor-
mation Technology, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 62–74, 2023.
[36] B. Varghese, N. Wang, S. Barbhuiya, P. Kilpatrick, and D. S.
Nikolopoulos, “Challenges and opportunities in edge computing,” in
2016 IEEE International Conference on Smart Cloud (SmartCloud),
2016, pp. 20–26.
[37] F. Liu, G. Tang, Y. Li, Z. Cai, X. Zhang, and T. Zhou, “A Survey on
Edge Computing Systems and Tools,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol.
107, no. 8, pp. 1537–1562, Aug. 2019, arXiv:1911.02794 [cs].
[38] B. Lu, J. Yang, and S. Ren, “Poster: Scaling up deep neural network
optimization for edge inference,” in 2020 IEEE/ACM Symposium on
Edge Computing (SEC), 2020, pp. 170–172.
[39] S. P. Baller, A. Jindal, M. Chadha, and M. Gerndt, “Deepedgebench:
Benchmarking deep neural networks on edge devices,” in 2021 IEEE
International Conference on Cloud Engineering (IC2E), 2021, pp. 20–
30.
[40] C.-J. Wu, D. Brooks, K. Chen, D. Chen, S. Choudhury, M. Dukhan,
K. Hazelwood, E. Isaac, Y. Jia, B. Jia et al., “Machine learning
at facebook: Understanding inference at the edge,” in 2019 IEEE
international symposium on high performance computer architecture
(HPCA).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 331–344.
[41] C. P. Bailey, A. C. Depoian, and E. R. Adams, “Edge AI: Addressing
the Efficiency Paradigm,” in 2022 IEEE MetroCon, November 2022,
pp. 1–3.
[42] M. J. Kearns, The Computational Complexity of Machine Learning.
MIT Press, 1990, google-Books-ID: y5Txq1AkJoMC.
[43] H. Cai, C. Gan, L. Zhu, and S. Han, “TinyTL: Reduce Memory, Not
Parameters for Efficient On-Device Learning,” in Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, vol. 33.
Curran Associates, Inc.,
2020, pp. 11 285–11 297.
[44] J. Lin, L. Zhu, W.-M. Chen, W.-C. Wang, C. Gan, and S. Han,
“On-device training under 256kb memory,” in Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal,
D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh, Eds., vol. 35.
Curran Associates,
Inc., 2022, pp. 22 941–22 954.
[45] A. Tashakori, W. Zhang, Z. Jane Wang, and P. Servati, “Semipfl:
Personalized semi-supervised federated learning framework for edge
intelligence,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 10, no. 10, pp.
9161–9176, 2023.
[46] K. Afachao and A. M. Abu-Mahfouz, “A review of intelligent iot
devices at the edge,” 2022 International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence of Things (ICAIoT), pp. 1–6, 2022.
[47] F. Bellotti, R. Berta, A. De Gloria, J. Doyle, and F. Sakr, “Exploring
Unsupervised Learning on STM32 F4 Microcontroller,” in Applications
in Electronics Pervading Industry, Environment and Society, vol. 738,
2021, pp. 39–46.
[48] W. Zhu and Z. Lu, “Evaluation of time series clustering on embedded
sensor platform,” in 2021 24th Euromicro Conference on Digital System
Design (DSD), 2021, pp. 187–191.
[49] M. T. Yazici, S. Basurra, and M. M. Gaber, “Edge machine learning:
Enabling smart internet of things applications,” Big Data and Cognitive
Computing, vol. 2, no. 3, 2018.
[50] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y. Arcas,
“Communication-Efficient Learning of Deep Networks from Decen-
tralized Data,” in Proceedings of the 20th International Conference
on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, ser. Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, A. Singh and J. Zhu, Eds., vol. 54.
PMLR, 20–22
Apr 2017, pp. 1273–1282.
[51] A. Das and T. Brunschwiler, “Privacy is what we care about: Ex-
perimental investigation of federated learning on edge devices,” in
Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Challenges in
Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning for Internet of Things.
Association for Computing Machinery, 2019, pp. 39–42.
[52] B. Jiang, J. Li, H. Wang, and H. Song, “Privacy-Preserving Feder-
ated Learning for Industrial Edge Computing via Hybrid Differential
Privacy and Adaptive Compression,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Informatics, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1136–1144, 2023.
[53] T. Liu, B. Di, and L. Song, “Privacy-Preserving Federated Edge
Learning: Modeling and Optimization,” IEEE Communications Letters,
vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 1489–1493, 2022.
[54] S. Abbas, A. Hejaili, G. Sampedro, M. Abisado, A. Almadhor,
T. Shahzad, and K. Ouahada, “A Novel Federated Edge Learning
Approach for Detecting Cyberattacks in IoT Infrastructures,” IEEE
Access, vol. 11, pp. 112 189–112 198, 2023.
[55] Z. Li, X. Cheng, J. Zhang, and B. Chen, “Predicting Advanced
Persistent Threats for IoT Systems Based on Federated Learning,” in
Security, Privacy, and Anonymity in Computation, Communication, and
Storage, vol. 12382 LNCS, 2021, pp. 76–89.
[56] J. Sidhpura, P. Shah, R. Veerkhare, and A. Godbole, “FedSpam: Privacy
Preserving SMS Spam Prediction,” in Neural Information Processing,
vol. 1793 CCIS.
Springer Nature Singapore, 2023, pp. 52–63.
[57] S. Sriraman, S. Kannan, S. Ravishankar, and B. Bharathi, “An On-
device Federated Learning System for SMS Spam Classification,”
in 2022 IEEE MIT Undergraduate Research Technology Conference
(URTC), 2022.
[58] M. El Hanjri, H. Kabbaj, A. Kobbane, and A. Abouaomar, “Federated
Learning for Water Consumption Forecasting in Smart Cities,” in ICC
2023 - IEEE International Conference on Communications, vol. 2023-
May, 2023, pp. 1798–1803.
[59] Y. Shi, X. Li, and S. Chen, “Towards Smart and Efficient Service
Systems: Computational Layered Federated Learning Framework,”
IEEE Network, pp. 1–8, 2023.
[60] Y. Cheriguene, W. Jaafar, H. Yanikomeroglu, and C. Kerrache, “To-
wards Reliable Participation in UAV-Enabled Federated Edge Learning
on Non-IID Data,” IEEE Open Journal of Vehicular Technology, vol. 5,
pp. 125–141, 2024.
[61] Y. Ye, S. Li, F. Liu, Y. Tang, and W. Hu, “EdgeFed: Optimized
Federated Learning Based on Edge Computing,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
pp. 209 191–209 198, 2020.
[62] R. Liu, Y. Cao, M. Yoshikawa, and H. Chen, “FedSel: Federated SGD
Under Local Differential Privacy with Top-k Dimension Selection,”
in Database Systems for Advanced Applications, vol. 12112 LNCS.
Springer International Publishing, 2020, pp. 485–501.
[63] S. Mahara, M. Shruti, and B. Bharath, “Multi-Task Federated Edge
Learning (MTFeeL) With SignSGD,” in 2022 National Conference on
Communications (NCC), 2022, pp. 379–384.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST XXXX
22
[64] Y. Zeng, Y. Mu, J. Yuan, S. Teng, J. Zhang, J. Wan, Y. Ren,
and Y. Zhang, “Adaptive Federated Learning With Non-IID Data,”
Computer Journal, vol. 66, no. 11, pp. 2758–2772, 2023.
[65] B. Alhalabi, S. Basurra, and M. Gaber, “FedNets: Federated Learning
on Edge Devices Using Ensembles of Pruned Deep Neural Networks,”
IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 30 726–30 738, 2023.
[66] B. Zhao, T. Wang, and L. Fang, “FedCom: Byzantine-Robust Federated
Learning Using Data Commitment,” in ICC 2023 - IEEE International
Conference on Communications, vol. 2023-May, 2023, pp. 33–38.
[67] Y. Kim and C.-J. Wu, “FedGPO: Heterogeneity-Aware Global Param-
eter optimization for Efficient Federated Learning,” in 2022 IEEE In-
ternational Symposium on Workload Characterization (IISWC), 2022,
pp. 117–129.
[68] Y. Liu, Y. Zhu, and J. Yu, “Resource-Constrained Federated Edge
Learning With Heterogeneous Data: Formulation and Analysis,” IEEE
Transactions on Network Science and Engineering, vol. 9, no. 5, pp.
3166–3178, 2022.
[69] H. Lv, Z. Zheng, T. Luo, F. Wu, S. Tang, L. Hua, R. Jia, and C. Lv,
“Data-Free Evaluation of User Contributions in Federated Learning,”
in 2021 19th International Symposium on Modeling and Optimization
in Mobile, Ad hoc, and Wireless Networks (WiOpt), 2021.
[70] G. Gudur and S. Perepu, “Zero-shot federated learning with new classes
for audio classification,” in Proc. Interspeech 2021, vol. 2, 2021, pp.
1041–1045.
[71] S. Savazzi, M. Nicoli, and V. Rampa, “Federated learning with cooper-
ating devices: A consensus approach for massive iot networks,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 4641–4654, 2020.
[72] M. Gupta, P. Goyal, R. Verma, R. Shorey, and H. Saran, “Fedfm:
Towards a robust federated learning approach for fault mitigation at
the edge nodes,” in 2022 14th International Conference on COMmu-
nication Systems & NETworkS (COMSNETS), 2022, pp. 362–370.
[73] A. Agrawal, D. Kulkarni, and S. Nair, “On Decentralizing Federated
Learning,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man,
and Cybernetics (SMC), vol. 2020-October, 2020, pp. 1590–1595.
[74] H. Gu, B. Guo, J. Wang, W. Sun, J. Liu, S. Liu, and Z. Yu, “FedAux:
An Efficient Framework for Hybrid Federated Learning,” in ICC 2022
- IEEE International Conference on Communications, vol. 2022-May,
2022, pp. 195–200.
[75] F. Zhang, J. Ge, C. Wong, S. Zhang, C. Li, and B. Luo, “Optimizing
Federated Edge Learning on Non-IID Data via Neural Architecture
Search,” in 2021 IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBE-
COM), 2021.
[76] R. Sharma, A. Ramakrishna, A. MacLaughlin, A. Rumshisky, J. Maj-
mudar, C. Chung, S. Avestimehr, and R. Gupta, “Federated Learning
with Noisy User Feedback,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.03092, pp.
2726–2739, 2022.
[77] L. Liu, J. Zhang, S. Song, and K. Letaief, “Client-Edge-Cloud Hier-
archical Federated Learning,” in ICC 2020 - 2020 IEEE International
Conference on Communications (ICC), vol. 2020-June, 2020.
[78] M. Abad, E. Ozfatura, D. G¨und¨uz, and O. Ercetin, “Hierarchical
federated learning across heterogeneous cellular networks,” in ICASSP
2020 - 2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing (ICASSP), vol. 2020-May, 2020, pp. 8866–8870.
[79] M. Ma, L. Wu, W. Liu, N. Chen, Z. Shao, and Y. Yang, “Data-aware
Hierarchical Federated Learning via Task Offloading,” in 2022 IEEE
Global Communications Conference, GLOBECOM 2022 - Proceed-
ings, 2022, pp. 3011–3016.
[80] W. Wen, H. Yang, W. Xia, and T. Quek, “Towards Fast and Energy-
Efficient Hierarchical Federated Edge Learning: A Joint Design for
Helper Scheduling and Resource Allocation,” in IEEE International
Conference on Communications, vol. 2022-May, 2022, pp. 5378–5383.
[81] M. Amiri, T. Duman, D. Gunduz, S. Kulkarni, and H. Poor, “Blind
Federated Edge Learning,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communi-
cations, vol. 20, no. 8, pp. 5129–5143, 2021.
[82] K.-Y. Liang, A. Srinivasan, and J. Andresen, “Modular Federated
Learning,” in Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on
Neural Networks, vol. 2022-July, 2022.
[83] F. Sattler, K.-R. M¨uller, and W. Samek, “Clustered federated learn-
ing: Model-agnostic distributed multitask optimization under privacy
constraints,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning
Systems, vol. 32, no. 8, pp. 3710–3722, 2021.
[84] T. Fan, Y. Kang, G. Ma, W. Chen, W. Wei, L. Fan, and Q. Yang,
“Fate-llm: A industrial grade federated learning framework for large
language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.10049, 2023.
[85] M. Xu, D. Cai, Y. Wu, X. Li, and S. Wang, “Fwdllm: Efficient fedllm
using forward gradient,” 2024.
[86] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “Bert: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
[87] Y. Tian, Y. Wan, L. Lyu, D. Yao, H. Jin, and L. Sun, “FedBERT:
When Federated Learning Meets Pre-training,” ACM Transactions on
Intelligent Systems and Technology, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 66:1–66:26,
August 2022.
[88] Z. Lit, S. Sit, J. Wang, and J. Xiao, “Federated split bert for hetero-
geneous text classification,” in 2022 International Joint Conference on
Neural Networks (IJCNN), 2022, pp. 1–8.
[89] V. Sanh, L. Debut, J. Chaumond, and T. Wolf, “Distilbert, a distilled
version of bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1910.01108, 2019.
[90] J. Tao, Z. Gao, and Z. Guo, “Training Vision Transformers in Federated
Learning with Limited Edge-Device Resources,” Electronics, vol. 11,
no. 17, p. 2638, January 2022, number: 17 Publisher: Multidisciplinary
Digital Publishing Institute.
[91] T.-M. Hsu, H. Qi, and M. Brown, “Federated Visual Classification with
Real-World Data Distribution,” in Lecture Notes in Computer Science
(including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture
Notes in Bioinformatics), vol. 12355 LNCS, 2020, pp. 76–92.
[92] W. Yu, J. Freiwald, S. Tewes, F. Huennemeyer, and D. Kolossa,
“Federated Learning in ASR: Not as Easy as You Think,” in 14th
ITG Conference on Speech Communication, 2021, pp. 19–23.
[93] J. Jia, J. Mahadeokar, W. Zheng, Y. Shangguan, O. Kalinli, and F. Seide,
“Federated Domain Adaptation for ASR with Full Self-Supervision,”
in Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the International Speech
Communication Association, INTERSPEECH, vol. 2022-September,
2022, pp. 536–540.
[94] D. Guliani, L. Zhou, C. Ryu, T.-J. Yang, H. Zhang, Y. Xiao, F. Bea-
ufays, and G. Motta, “Enabling On-Device training of speech recog-
nition models with federated dropout,” in ICASSP, IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing - Proceedings,
vol. 2022-May, 2022, pp. 8757–8761.
[95] D. Guliani, F. Beaufays, and G. Motta, “Training speech recognition
models with federated learning: A quality/cost framework,” in ICASSP,
IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Pro-
cessing - Proceedings, vol. 2021-June, 2021, pp. 3080–3084.
[96] C. Bai, X. Cui, and A. Li, “Robust speech recognition model using
multi-source federal learning after distillation and deep edge intelli-
gence,” in Journal of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 2033, 2021,
issue: 1.
[97] T. Zhang, T. Feng, S. Alam, S. Lee, M. Zhang, S. S. Narayanan,
and S. Avestimehr, “Fedaudio: A federated learning benchmark for
audio tasks,” in ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP).
IEEE, 2023, pp.
1–5.
[98] M. A. Hidayat, Y. Nakamura, B. Dawton, and Y. Arakawa, “AGC-DP:
Differential Privacy with Adaptive Gaussian Clipping for Federated
Learning,” in 24th IEEE International Conference on Mobile Data
Management (MDM), Jul. 2023, pp. 199–208, iSSN: 2375-0324.
[99] C. Dwork, “Differential Privacy: A Survey of Results,” in Theory and
Applications of Models of Computation, M. Agrawal, D. Du, Z. Duan,
and A. Li, Eds.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 2008, pp. 1–19.
[100] Y. Zhang, Y. Lu, and F. Liu, “A Systematic Survey for Differential
Privacy Techniques in Federated Learning,” Journal of Information
Security, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 111–135, Feb. 2023, number: 2 Publisher:
Scientific Research Publishing.
[101] K. Wei, J. Li, M. Ding, C. Ma, H. H. Yang, F. Farokhi, S. Jin, T. Q. S.
Quek, and H. Vincent Poor, “Federated Learning With Differential
Privacy: Algorithms and Performance Analysis,” IEEE Transactions
on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 15, pp. 3454–3469, 2020.
[102] C. Thapa, P. C. M. Arachchige, S. Camtepe, and L. Sun, “SplitFed:
When federated learning meets split learning,” in Proceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 36, no. 8, 2022, pp.
8485–8493.
[103] D. Zou, X. Liu, L. Sun, J. Duan, R. Li, Y. Xu, W. Li, and S. Lu,
“FedMC: Federated Reinforcement Learning on the Edge with Meta-
Critic Networks,” in Conference Proceedings of the IEEE International
Performance, Computing, and Communications Conference, vol. 2022-
November, 2022, pp. 344–351.
[104] S. Yue, J. Ren, J. Xin, D. Zhang, Y. Zhang, and W. Zhuang, “Efficient
Federated Meta-Learning over Multi-Access Wireless Networks,” IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 1556–
1570, 2022.
[105] J. Suzuki, S. Lameh, and Y. Amannejad, “Using Transfer Learning in
Building Federated Learning Models on Edge Devices,” in 2021 2nd
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST XXXX
23
International Conference on Intelligent Data Science Technologies and
Applications, IDSTA 2021, 2021, pp. 105–113.
[106] E. Tanghatari, M. Kamal, A. Afzali-Kusha, and M. Pedram, “Federated
learning by employing knowledge distillation on edge devices with
limited hardware resources,” Neurocomputing, vol. 531, pp. 87–99,
April 2023.
[107] X. Qu, J. Wang, and J. Xiao, “Quantization and Knowledge Distillation
for Efficient Federated Learning on Edge Devices,” in Proceedings
- 2020 IEEE 22nd International Conference on High Performance
Computing and Communications, IEEE 18th International Conference
on Smart City and IEEE 6th International Conference on Data Science
and Systems, HPCC-SmartCity-DSS 2020, 2020, pp. 967–972.
[108] L. Liu, J. Zhang, S. Song, and K. Letaief, “Hierarchical Federated
Learning with Quantization: Convergence Analysis and System De-
sign,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 22, no. 1,
pp. 2–18, 2023.
[109] K. Palanisamy, V. Khimani, M. H. Moti, and D. Chatzopoulos,
“SplitEasy: A Practical Approach for Training ML models on Mobile
Devices,” in Proceedings of the 22nd International Workshop on Mobile
Computing Systems and Applications, February 2021, pp. 37–43.
[110] S. Liu, L. Xin, X. Lyu, and C. Ren, “Masking-enabled Data Protection
Approach for Accurate Split Learning,” in IEEE Wireless Communi-
cations and Networking Conference, WCNC, vol. 2023-March, 2023,
iSSN: 1525-3511.
[111] S. Fu, F. Dong, D. Shen, and Q. He, “Joint Quality Evaluation,
Model Splitting and Resource Provisioning for Split Edge Learning,”
in Annual IEEE Communications Society Conference on Sensor, Mesh
and Ad Hoc Communications and Networks workshops, vol. 2023-
September, 2023, pp. 420–428, iSSN: 2155-5486.
[112] A. Chopra, S. K. Sahu, A. Singh, A. Java, P. Vepakomma, M. M.
Amiri, and R. Raskar, “Adaptive Split Learning,” in Federated Learning
Systems (FLSys) Workshop @ MLSys 2023, July 2023.
[113] A.
Chopra,
S.
K.
Sahu,
A.
Singh,
A.
Java,
P.
Vepakomma,
V. Sharma, and R. Raskar, “AdaSplit: Adaptive Trade-offs for
Resource-constrained Distributed Deep Learning,” December 2021,
arXiv:2112.01637 [cs].
[114] E. Samikwa, A. D. Maio, and T. Braun, “ARES: Adaptive Resource-
Aware Split Learning for Internet of Things,” Computer Networks, vol.
218, p. 109380, December 2022.
[115] A. Ayad, M. Renner, and A. Schmeink, “Improving the Communication
and Computation Efficiency of Split Learning for IoT Applications,” in
2021 IEEE Global Communications Conference, GLOBECOM 2021 -
Proceedings, 2021.
[116] Z. Cheng, X. Xia, M. Liwang, X. Fan, Y. Sun, X. Wang, and
L. Huang, “CHEESE: Distributed Clustering-Based Hybrid Federated
Split Learning Over Edge Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Parallel
and Distributed Systems, vol. 34, no. 12, pp. 3174–3191, 2023.
[117] Q. Duan, S. Hu, R. Deng, and Z. Lu, “Combined federated and split
learning in edge computing for ubiquitous intelligence in internet of
things: State-of-the-art and future directions,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 16,
2022.
[118] C. Li, H. Yang, Z. Sun, Q. Yao, J. Zhang, A. Yu, A. Vasilakos,
S. Liu, and Y. Li, “High-Precision Cluster Federated Learning for Smart
Home: An Edge-Cloud Collaboration Approach,” IEEE Access, vol. 11,
pp. 102 157–102 168, 2023.
[119] S. Fu, F. Dong, D. Shen, and T. Lu, “Privacy-preserving model splitting
and quality-aware device association for federated edge learning,”
Software - Practice and Experience, 2023.
[120] S. Zhang, H. Tu, Z. Li, S. Liu, S. Li, W. Wu, and X. Shen, “Cluster-
HSFL: A Cluster-Based Hybrid Split and Federated Learning,” in 2023
IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in China,
ICCC 2023, 2023.
[121] Y. Wang, Z. Tian, X. Fan, Y. Huo, C. Nowzari, and K. Zeng,
“Distributed Swarm Learning for Internet of Things at the Edge: Where
Artificial Intelligence Meets Biological Intelligence,” October 2022.
[122] X. Fan, Y. Wang, Y. Huo, and Z. Tian, “Efficient Distributed Swarm
Learning for Edge Computing,” in IEEE International Conference on
Communications, vol. 2023-May, 2023, pp. 3627–3632, iSSN: 1550-
3607.
[123] I. Heged˝us, G. Danner, and M. Jelasity, “Gossip Learning as a Decen-
tralized Alternative to Federated Learning,” in Distributed Applications
and Interoperable Systems, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
J. Pereira and L. Ricci, Eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing,
2019, pp. 74–90.
[124] S.-M. Bagoly and R. Danescu, “Round Based Extension Algorithm
for Gossip Learning,” in Proceedings - 2020 IEEE 16th International
Conference on Intelligent Computer Communication and Processing,
ICCP 2020, 2020, pp. 251–257.
[125] S. J. Pan and Q. Yang, “A survey on transfer learning,” IEEE Transac-
tions on knowledge and data engineering, vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 1345–
1359, 2009.
[126] C. Tan, F. Sun, T. Kong, W. Zhang, C. Yang, and C. Liu, “A Survey on
Deep Transfer Learning,” in Artificial Neural Networks and Machine
Learning – ICANN 2018, V. K˚urkov´a, Y. Manolopoulos, B. Hammer,
L. Iliadis, and I. Maglogiannis, Eds.
Cham: Springer International
Publishing, 2018, pp. 270–279.
[127] F. Zhuang, Z. Qi, K. Duan, D. Xi, Y. Zhu, H. Zhu, H. Xiong, and
Q. He, “A Comprehensive Survey on Transfer Learning,” Proceedings
of the IEEE, vol. 109, no. 1, pp. 43–76, Jan. 2021, conference Name:
Proceedings of the IEEE.
[128] L. Yang, A. Rakin, and D. Fan, “RepNet: Efficient On-Device Learning
via Feature Reprogramming,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Computer
Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, vol.
2022-June, 2022, pp. 12 267–12 276.
[129] H.-Y. Chiang, N. Frumkin, F. Liang, and D. Marculescu, “MobileTL:
On-Device Transfer Learning with Inverted Residual Blocks,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 37th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI
2023, vol. 37, 2023, pp. 7166–7174.
[130] B. Yang, O. Fagbohungbe, X. Cao, C. Yuen, L. Qian, D. Niyato,
and Y. Zhang, “A Joint Energy and Latency Framework for Transfer
Learning over 5G Industrial Edge Networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Informatics, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 531–541, 2022.
[131] S. Choi, J. Shin, and L.-S. Kim, “Accelerating on-device dnn training
workloads via runtime convergence monitor,” IEEE Transactions on
Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, vol. 42,
no. 5, pp. 1574–1587, 2022.
[132] K. Ahmed, A. Imteaj, and M. Amini, “Federated Deep Learning for
Heterogeneous Edge Computing,” in Proceedings - 20th IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning and Applications, ICMLA
2021, 2021, pp. 1146–1152.
[133] S. Liu, S. Xu, W. Yu, Z. Fu, Y. Zhang, and A. Marian, “FedCT:
Federated Collaborative Transfer for Recommendation,” in SIGIR 2021
- Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval, 2021, pp. 716–
725.
[134] D. Vucetic, M. Tayaranian, M. Ziaeefard, J. Clark, B. Meyer, and
W. Gross, “Efficient Fine-Tuning of BERT Models on the Edge,” in
Proceedings - IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems,
vol. 2022-May, 2022, pp. 1838–1842.
[135] Y. Wu, Y. Chen, L. Wang, Y. Ye, Z. Liu, Y. Guo, and Y. Fu,
“Large Scale Incremental Learning,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019, pp.
374–382.
[136] J. Zuo, G. Arvanitakis, and H. Hacid, “On Handling Catastrophic
Forgetting for Incremental Learning of Human Physical Activity on
the Edge,” February 2023, arXiv:2302.09310 [cs].
[137] G. SHI, J. CHEN, W. Zhang, L.-M. Zhan, and X.-M. Wu, “Overcoming
Catastrophic Forgetting in Incremental Few-Shot Learning by Finding
Flat Minima,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
vol. 34.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2021, pp. 6747–6761.
[138] H.-G. Doan, H.-Q. Luong, T.-O. Ha, and T. T. T. Pham, “An Efficient
Strategy for Catastrophic Forgetting Reduction in Incremental Learn-
ing,” Electronics, vol. 12, no. 10, p. 2265, January 2023, number: 10
Publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute.
[139] Q. Yang, Y. Gu, and D. Wu, “Survey of incremental learning,” in 2019
chinese control and decision conference (ccdc). IEEE, 2019, pp. 399–
404.
[140] M. A. Hussain, S.-A. Huang, and T.-H. Tsai, “Learning With Sharing:
An Edge-Optimized Incremental Learning Method for Deep Neural
Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing,
vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 461–473, April 2023, conference Name: IEEE
Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing.
[141] S. Disabato and M. Roveri, “Incremental On-Device Tiny Machine
Learning,” in AIChallengeIoT 2020 - Proceedings of the 2020 2nd
International Workshop on Challenges in Artificial Intelligence and
Machine Learning for Internet of Things, 2020, pp. 7–13.
[142] J. Liu, Z. Xie, D. Nikolopoulos, and D. Li, “RIANN: Real-time
incremental learning with approximate nearest neighbor on mobile
devices,” in OpML 2020 - 2020 USENIX Conference on Operational
Machine Learning, 2020.
[143] D. Li, S. Tasci, S. Ghosh, J. Zhu, J. Zhang, and L. Heck, “RILOD:
near real-time incremental learning for object detection at the edge,” in
Proceedings of the 4th ACM/IEEE Symposium on Edge Computing, ser.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST XXXX
24
SEC ’19. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
November 2019, pp. 113–126.
[144] M. Rao, G. Chennupati, G. Tiwari, A. Kumar Sahu, A. Raju, A. Ras-
trow, and J. Droppo, “Federated Self-Learning with Weak Supervision
for Speech Recognition,” in ICASSP, IEEE International Conference
on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing - Proceedings, 2023.
[145] S. Yue, J. Ren, J. Xin, S. Lin, and J. Zhang, “Inexact-ADMM Based
Federated Meta-Learning for Fast and Continual Edge Learning,” in
Proceedings of the Twenty-second International Symposium on Theory,
Algorithmic Foundations, and Protocol Design for Mobile Networks
and Mobile Computing, July 2021, pp. 91–100, arXiv:2012.08677 [cs].
[146] Y. Luo, Z. Huang, Z. Zhang, Z. Wang, M. Baktashmotlagh, and
Y. Yang, “Learning from the past: Continual meta-learning with
bayesian graph neural networks,” in AAAI 2020 - 34th AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, 2020, pp. 5021–5028.
[147] Z.-H. Wang, Z. He, H. Fang, Y.-X. Huang, Y. Sun, Y. Yang, Z.-
Y. Zhang, and D. Liu, “Efficient On-Device Incremental Learning
by Weight Freezing,” in 2022 27th Asia and South Pacific Design
Automation Conference (ASP-DAC), January 2022, pp. 538–543, iSSN:
2153-697X.
[148] A. Carta, A. Cossu, V. Lomonaco, D. Bacciu, and J. van de Wei-
jer, “Projected Latent Distillation for Data-Agnostic Consolidation in
Distributed Continual Learning,” March 2023, arXiv:2303.15888 [cs]
version: 1.
[149] X. Zhang, H. Li, X. Chen, and X. Liu, “Impact Patterns of Combining
Model Pruning and Continual Learning on Model Performance,” in
Proceedings - 2021 IEEE 3rd International Conference on Cognitive
Machine Intelligence, CogMI 2021, 2021, pp. 27–33.
[150] Z. Wang, Z. Zhan, Y. Gong, G. Yuan, W. Niu, T. Jian, B. Ren,
S. Ioannidis, Y. Wang, and J. Dy, “SparCL: Sparse Continual Learning
on the Edge,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
vol. 35, 2022.
[151] A. Nichol, J. Achiam, and J. Schulman, “On First-Order Meta-Learning
Algorithms,” October 2018, arXiv:1803.02999 [cs].
[152] M. Huisman, J. N. van Rijn, and A. Plaat, “A survey of deep meta-
learning,” Artificial Intelligence Review, vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 4483–4541,
Aug. 2021.
[153] T. Hospedales, A. Antoniou, P. Micaelli, and A. Storkey, “Meta-
Learning in Neural Networks: A Survey,” Nov. 2020, arXiv:2004.05439
[cs, stat].
[154] Z. Qu, Z. Zhou, Y. Tong, and L. Thiele, “p-Meta: Towards On-device
Deep Model Adaptation,” in Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, August 2022,
pp. 1441–1451, arXiv:2206.12705 [cs].
[155] B. Rosenfeld, B. Rajendran, and O. Simeone, “Fast on-device adap-
tation for spiking neural networks via online-within-online meta-
learning,” in 2021 IEEE Data Science and Learning Workshop, DSLW
2021, 2021.
[156] D. Gao, X. He, Z. Zhou, Y. Tong, and L. Thiele, “Pruning Meta-Trained
Networks for On-Device Adaptation,” in International Conference on
Information and Knowledge Management, Proceedings, 2021, pp. 514–
523.
[157] F. Yu, H. Lin, X. Wang, S. Garg, G. Kaddoum, S. Singh, and
M. M. Hassan, “Communication-Efficient Personalized Federated
Meta-Learning in Edge Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Network and
Service Management, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1558–1571, June 2023, confer-
ence Name: IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management.
[158] J. Gou, B. Yu, S. J. Maybank, and D. Tao, “Knowledge distillation: A
survey,” International Journal of Computer Vision, vol. 129, pp. 1789–
1819, 2021.
[159] H. Nam, J. Park, and S.-L. Kim, “Active Wireless Split Learning
via Online Cloud-Local Server Delta-Knowledge Distillation,” in 2023
IEEE International Conference on Communications Workshops: Sus-
tainable Communications for Renaissance, ICC Workshops 2023, 2023,
pp. 825–830.
[160] X. Xia, H. Yin, J. Yu, Q. Wang, G. Xu, and Q. Nguyen, “On-
Device Next-Item Recommendation with Self-Supervised Knowledge
Distillation,” in SIGIR 2022 - Proceedings of the 45th International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval, 2022, pp. 546–555.
[161] Y.-G. Qian, J. Ma, N.-N. He, B. Wang, Z.-Q. Gu, X. Ling, and
S. Wassim, “Two-stage Adversarial Knowledge Transfer for Edge
Intelligence,” Ruan Jian Xue Bao/Journal of Software, vol. 33, no. 12,
pp. 4504–4516, 2022.
[162] Y. Zhou, X. Ma, D. Wu, and X. Li, “Communication-Efficient and
Attack-Resistant Federated Edge Learning with Dataset Distillation,”
IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2517–2528,
2023.
[163] A. Hard, K. Partridge, N. Chen, S. Augenstein, A. Shah, H. Park,
A. Park, S. Ng, J. Nguyen, I. Moreno, R. Mathews, and F. Beaufays,
“Production federated keyword spotting via distillation, filtering, and
joint federated-centralized training,” in Proceedings of the Annual
Conference of the International Speech Communication Association,
INTERSPEECH, vol. 2022-September, 2022, pp. 76–80.
[164] S. Oh, J. Park, E. Jeong, H. Kim, M. Bennis, and S.-L. Kim,
“Mix2FLD: Downlink Federated Learning after Uplink Federated Dis-
tillation with Two-Way Mixup,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 24,
no. 10, pp. 2211–2215, 2020.
[165] J.-H. Ahn, O. Simeone, and J. Kang, “Wireless Federated Distillation
for Distributed Edge Learning with Heterogeneous Data,” in IEEE
International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Com-
munications, PIMRC, vol. 2019-September, 2019.
[166] D. Nguyen, S. Yu, J. Mu˜noz, and A. Jannesari, “Enhancing Heteroge-
neous Federated Learning with Knowledge Extraction and Multi-Model
Fusion,” in ACM International Conference Proceeding Series, 2023, pp.
36–43.
[167] I. Bistritz, A. Mann, and N. Bambos, “Distributed Distillation for
On-Device Learning,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, vol. 33.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2020, pp. 22 593–22 604.
[168] X. Xia, J. Yu, Q. Wang, C. Yang, N. Hung, and H. Yin, “Efficient
On-Device Session-Based Recommendation,” ACM Transactions on
Information Systems, vol. 41, no. 4, 2023.
[169] J. Yao, F. Wang, K. Jia, B. Han, J. Zhou, and H. Yang, “Device-Cloud
Collaborative Learning for Recommendation,” in Proceedings of the
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining, 2021, pp. 3865–3874.
[170] J. Wong, J. Nerbonne, and Q. Zhang, “Ultra-efficient edge cardiac
disease detection towards real-time precision health,” IEEE Access, pp.
1–1, 2023.
[171] I. Jang, H. Kim, D. Lee, Y.-S. Son, and S. Kim, “Knowledge Transfer
for On-Device Deep Reinforcement Learning in Resource Constrained
Edge Computing Systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 146 588–146 597,
2020.
[172] M. R. Sebti, A. Accettola, R. Carotenuto, and M. Merenda, “Dataset
Distillation Technique Enabling ML On-board Training: Preliminary
Results,” in Proceedings of SIE 2023, ser. Lecture Notes in Electrical
Engineering, C. Ciofi and E. Limiti, Eds.
Cham: Springer Nature
Switzerland, 2024, pp. 379–384.
[173] A. G. Accettola and M. Merenda, “Dataset distillation as an enabling
technique for on-device training in TinyML for IoT: an RFID use
case,” in 2023 8th International Conference on Smart and Sustainable
Technologies (SpliTech), June 2023, pp. 1–4.
[174] H. Hu, S. Siniscalchi, C.-H. Yang, and C.-H. Lee, “A VARIATIONAL
Bayesian APPROACH TO LEARNING LATENT VARIABLES FOR
ACOUSTIC KNOWLEDGE TRANSFER,” in ICASSP, IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing -
Proceedings, vol. 2022-May, 2022, pp. 1041–1045, iSSN: 1520-6149.
[175] A. Gholami, S. Kim, Z. Dong, Z. Yao, M. W. Mahoney, and K. Keutzer,
“A survey of quantization methods for efficient neural network infer-
ence,” in Low-Power Computer Vision. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2022,
pp. 291–326.
[176] A. Kwasniewska, M. Szankin, M. Ozga, J. Wolfe, A. Das, A. Zajac,
J. Ruminski, and P. Rad, “Deep Learning Optimization for Edge
Devices: Analysis of Training Quantization Parameters,” in IECON
2019 - 45th Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics
Society, vol. 1, October 2019, pp. 96–101, iSSN: 2577-1647.
[177] M. Ostertag, S. Al-Doweesh, and T. Rosing, “Efficient Training on
Edge Devices Using Online Quantization,” in Proceedings of the 2020
Design, Automation and Test in Europe Conference and Exhibition,
DATE 2020, 2020, pp. 1011–1014.
[178] Y. Li, Y. Cui, and V. Lau, “An Optimization Framework for Federated
Edge Learning,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications,
vol. 22, pp. 934–949, February 2023.
[179] S. Choi, J. Shin, Y. Choi, and L.-S. Kim, “An optimized design
technique of low-bit neural network training for personalization on
IoT devices,” in Proceedings - Design Automation Conference, 2019,
iSSN: 0738-100X.
[180] Y. Chen, C. Hawkins, K. Zhang, Z. Zhang, and C. Hao, “3U-EdgeAI:
Ultra-Low Memory Training, Ultra-Low Bitwidth Quantization, and
Ultra-Low Latency Acceleration,” in Proceedings of the ACM Great
Lakes Symposium on VLSI, GLSVLSI, 2021, pp. 157–162.
[181] H. Li, R. Wang, W. Zhang, and J. Wu, “One Bit Aggregation for Feder-
ated Edge Learning with Reconfigurable Intelligent Surface: Analysis
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST XXXX
25
and Optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications,
vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 872–888, 2023.
[182] G. Zhu, Y. Du, D. G¨und¨uz, and K. Huang, “One-Bit Over-the-Air
Aggregation for Communication-Efficient Federated Edge Learning:
Design and Convergence Analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 2120–2135, 2021.
[183] H. Li, R. Wang, J. Wu, and W. Zhang, “Federated edge learning
via reconfigurable intelligent surface with one-bit quantization,” in
GLOBECOM 2022-2022 IEEE Global Communications Conference.
IEEE, 2022, pp. 1055–1060.
[184] Y. Cui, J. Guo, C. Wen, and S. Jin, “Communication-efficient Person-
alized Federated Edge Learning for Massive MIMO CSI Feedback,”
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, pp. 1–1, 2023.
[185] H. Yan, B. Tang, and B. Ye, “Joint Optimization of Bandwidth
Allocation and Gradient Quantization for Federated Edge Learning,”
in Lecture Notes in Computer Science, January 2022, pp. 444–455,
iSSN: 0302-9743.
[186] Z. Ren, W. Fang, W. Xu, Z. Li, and Y. Hu, “Research on Lightweight
Model Training Technology of Federated Learning for Railway Defect
Detection,” Tiedao Xuebao/Journal of the China Railway Society,
vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 77–83, 2023.
[187] R. Chen, L. Li, K. Xue, C. Zhang, M. Pan, and Y. Fang, “Energy
Efficient Federated Learning Over Heterogeneous Mobile Devices via
Joint Design of Weight Quantization and Wireless Transmission,” IEEE
Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 7451–7465,
2023.
[188] P. Liu, J. Jiang, G. Zhu, L. Cheng, W. Jiang, W. Luo, Y. Du, and
Z. Wang, “Training time minimization for federated edge learning with
optimized gradient quantization and bandwidth allocation,” Frontiers of
Information Technology & Electronic Engineering, vol. 23, no. 8, pp.
1247–1263, August 2022.
[189] J. Chauhan, Y. D. Kwon, and C. Mascolo, “Exploring On-Device
Learning Using Few Shots for Audio Classification,” in 30th European
Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO), August 2022, pp. 424–428,
iSSN: 2076-1465.
[190] Y. Yamagishi, T. Kaneko, M. Akai-Kasaya, and T. Asai, “Holmes: A
Hardware-Oriented Optimizer Using Logarithms,” IEICE Transactions
on Information and Systems, vol. E105D, no. 12, pp. 2040–2047, 2022.
[191] X. Zhou and D. Yan, “Model tree pruning,” International Journal of
Machine Learning and Cybernetics, vol. 10, pp. 3431–3444, 2019.
[192] W. Kwon, S. Kim, M. W. Mahoney, J. Hassoun, K. Keutzer, and
A. Gholami, “A fast post-training pruning framework for transformers,”
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp.
24 101–24 116, 2022.
[193] S. Choi, J. Shin, and L.-S. Kim, “A convergence monitoring method
for dnn training of on-device task adaptation,” in 2021 IEEE/ACM
International Conference On Computer Aided Design (ICCAD). IEEE,
2021, pp. 1–9.
[194] S. Yu, P. Nguyen, A. Anwar, and A. Jannesari, “Heterogeneous Feder-
ated Learning using Dynamic Model Pruning and Adaptive Gradient,”
in Proceedings - 23rd IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster,
Cloud and Internet Computing, CCGrid 2023, 2023, pp. 322–330.
[195] Y. Jiang, S. Wang, V. Valls, B. Ko, W.-H. Lee, K. Leung, and
L. Tassiulas, “Model Pruning Enables Efficient Federated Learning on
Edge Devices,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning
Systems, vol. 34, no. 12, pp. 10 374–10 386, 2023.
[196] S. Liu, G. Yu, R. Yin, J. Yuan, L. Shen, and C. Liu, “Joint Model
Pruning and Device Selection for Communication-Efficient Federated
Edge Learning,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 70, no. 1,
pp. 231–244, 2022.
[197] N. Mairittha, T. Mairittha, and S. Inoue, “On-device deep personaliza-
tion for robust activity data collection†,” Sensors (Switzerland), vol. 21,
no. 1, pp. 1–22, 2021.
[198] J. Han, Y. Ma, Q. Mei, and X. Liu, “Deeprec: On-device deep
learning for privacy-preserving sequential recommendation in mobile
commerce,” in The Web Conference 2021 - Proceedings of the World
Wide Web Conference, WWW 2021, 2021, pp. 900–911.
[199] J. Lee, S. Kim, S. Kim, W. Jo, J.-H. Kim, D. Han, and H.-J.
Yoo, “OmniDRL: An Energy-Efficient Deep Reinforcement Learning
Processor with Dual-Mode Weight Compression and Sparse Weight
Transposer,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 57, no. 4, pp.
999–1012, 2022.
[200] A. Hosny, M. Neseem, and S. Reda, “Sparse Bitmap Compression for
Memory-Efficient Training on the Edge,” in 6th ACM/IEEE Symposium
on Edge Computing, SEC 2021, 2021, pp. 14–25.
[201] M. Courbariaux, I. Hubara, D. Soudry, R. El-Yaniv, and Y. Ben-
gio, “Binarized neural networks: Training deep neural networks
with weights and activations constrained to+ 1 or-1,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1602.02830, 2016.
[202] E. Wang, J. J. Davis, D. Moro, P. Zielinski, J. J. Lim, C. Coelho,
S. Chatterjee, P. Y. K. Cheung, and G. A. Constantinides, “Enabling
Binary Neural Network Training on the Edge,” ACM Transactions
on Embedded Computing Systems, vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 105:1–105:19,
November 2023.
[203] L. Vorabbi, D. Maltoni, and S. Santi, “On-Device Learning with Binary
Neural Networks,” pp. 39–50, 2024.
[204] Y. Fujiwara and T. Kawahara, “BNN Training Algorithm with Ternary
Gradients and BNN based on MRAM Array,” in TENCON 2023 - 2023
IEEE Region 10 Conference (TENCON), October 2023, pp. 311–316,
iSSN: 2159-3450.
[205] B. Penkovsky, M. Bocquet, T. Hirtzlin, J.-O. Klein, E. Nowak,
E. Vianello, J.-M. Portal, and D. Querlioz, “In-Memory Resistive
RAM Implementation of Binarized Neural Networks for Medical
Applications,” in Proceedings of the 2020 Design, Automation and Test
in Europe Conference and Exhibition, DATE 2020, 2020, pp. 690–695.
[206] N. D. Pham, H. D. Nguyen, and D. H. Dang, “Efficient binarizing split
learning based deep models for mobile applications,” AIP Conference
Proceedings, vol. 2406, no. 1, p. 020015, September 2021.
[207] W. Gerstner and W. M. Kistler, Spiking neuron models: Single neurons,
populations, plasticity.
Cambridge university press, 2002.
[208] T. Tang, R. Luo, B. Li, H. Li, Y. Wang, and H. Yang, “Energy
efficient spiking neural network design with rram devices,” in 2014
International Symposium on Integrated Circuits (ISIC).
IEEE, 2014,
pp. 268–271.
[209] E. Lemaire, L. Cordone, A. Castagnetti, P.-E. Novac, J. Courtois, and
B. Miramond, “An analytical estimation of spiking neural networks
energy efficiency,” in International Conference on Neural Information
Processing.
Springer, 2022, pp. 574–587.
[210] J. Xue, L. Xie, F. Chen, L. Wu, Q. Tian, Y. Zhou, R. Ying, and P. Liu,
“Edgemap: An optimized mapping toolchain for spiking neural network
in edge computing,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 14, p. 6548, 2023.
[211] N. Skatchkovsky, H. Jang, and O. Simeone, “Federated Neuromorphic
Learning of Spiking Neural Networks for Low-Power Edge Intel-
ligence,” in ICASSP, IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing - Proceedings, vol. 2020-May, 2020,
pp. 8524–8528.
[212] A. M. Zyarah, N. Soures, and D. Kudithipudi, “On-Device Learning
in Memristor Spiking Neural Networks,” in 2018 IEEE International
Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), May 2018, pp. 1–5, iSSN:
2379-447X.
[213] N. Soures, L. Hays, E. Bohannon, A. M. Zyarah, and D. Kudithipudi,
“On-device STDP and synaptic normalization for neuromemristive
spiking neural network,” in 2017 IEEE 60th International Midwest
Symposium on Circuits and Systems (MWSCAS), August 2017, pp.
1081–1084, iSSN: 1558-3899.
[214] P. G. Stratton, T. J. Hamilton, and A. Wabnitz, “Unsupervised Feature
Vector Clustering Using Temporally Coded Spiking Networks,” in 2023
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), June
2023, pp. 1–7, iSSN: 2161-4407.
[215] G. Tang, K. Vadivel, Y. Xu, R. Bilgic, K. Shidqi, P. Detterer,
S. Traferro, M. Konijnenburg, M. Sifalakis, G.-J. van Schaik, and
A. Yousefzadeh, “SENECA: building a fully digital neuromorphic
processor, design trade-offs and challenges,” Frontiers in Neuroscience,
vol. 17, 2023.
[216] A. Safa, J. Van Assche, M. D. Alea, F. Catthoor, and G. G. Gielen,
“Neuromorphic Near-Sensor Computing: From Event-Based Sensing
to Edge Learning,” IEEE Micro, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 88–95, November
2022, conference Name: IEEE Micro.
[217] G. Hinton, “The Forward-Forward Algorithm: Some Preliminary In-
vestigations,” December 2022, arXiv:2212.13345 [cs].
[218] F. De Vita, R. M. A. Nawaiseh, D. Bruneo, V. Tomaselli, M. Lattuada,
and M. Falchetto, “µ-FF: On-Device Forward-Forward Training Algo-
rithm for Microcontrollers,” in 2023 IEEE International Conference
on Smart Computing (SMARTCOMP), June 2023, pp. 49–56, iSSN:
2693-8340.
[219] D. P. Pau and F. M. Aymone, “Suitability of forward-forward and pepita
learning to mlcommons-tiny benchmarks,” in 2023 IEEE International
Conference on Omni-layer Intelligent Systems (COINS).
IEEE, 2023,
pp. 1–6.
[220] G. Dellaferrera and G. Kreiman, “Error-driven input modulation:
Solving the credit assignment problem without a backward pass,” in
Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing, ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, K. Chaudhuri,
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST XXXX
26
S. Jegelka, L. Song, C. Szepesvari, G. Niu, and S. Sabato, Eds., vol.
162.
PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022, pp. 4937–4955.
[221] T. Rahman, A. Wheeldon, R. Shafik, A. Yakovlev, J. Lei, O.-C.
Granmo, and S. Das, “Data Booleanization for Energy Efficient On-
Chip Learning using Logic Driven AI,” in Proceedings - 2022 Inter-
national Symposium on the Tsetlin Machine, ISTM 2022, 2022, pp.
29–36.
[222] C. Profentzas, M. Almgren, and O. Landsiedel, “MiniLearn: On-Device
Learning for Low-Power IoT Devices,” in International Conference on
Embedded Wireless Systems and Networks, 2022, iSSN: 2562-2331.
[223] A. Carta, G. Carf`ı, V. De Caro, and C. Gallicchio, “Efficient Anomaly
Detection on Temporal Data via Echo State Networks and Dynamic
Thresholding,” in CEUR Workshop Proceedings, vol. 3350, 2023, pp.
56–67.
[224] D. Nadalini, M. Rusci, L. Benini, and F. Conti, “Reduced precision
floating-point optimization for Deep Neural Network On-Device Learn-
ing on microcontrollers,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol.
149, pp. 212–226, 2023.
[225] S. G. Patil, P. Jain, P. Dutta, I. Stoica, and J. Gonzalez, “POET: Training
neural networks on tiny devices with integrated rematerialization and
paging,” in Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on
Machine Learning, ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
vol. 162.
PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022, pp. 17 573–17 583.
[226] Y. Choukroun, E. Kravchik, F. Yang, and P. Kisilev, “Low-bit quanti-
zation of neural networks for efficient inference,” in 2019 IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision Workshop (ICCVW),
2019, pp. 3009–3018.
[227] M. Mohsin and D. Perera, “An FPGA-based hardware accelerator for k-
nearest neighbor classification for machine learning on mobile devices,”
in ACM International Conference Proceeding Series, 2018.
[228] J. Yang, Y. Sheng, Y. Zhang, W. Jiang, and L. Yang, “On-Device Un-
supervised Image Segmentation,” in Proceedings - Design Automation
Conference, vol. 2023-July, 2023.
[229] A. Albaseer, M. Abdallah, A. Al-Fuqaha, and A. Erbad, “Client
Selection Approach in Support of Clustered Federated Learning over
Wireless Edge Networks,” in 2021 IEEE Global Communications
Conference, GLOBECOM 2021 - Proceedings, 2021.
[230] D. Wang, N. Zhang, and M. Tao, “Clustered federated learning with
weighted model aggregation for imbalanced data,” China Communica-
tions, pp. 41–56, 2022.
[231] D. K. Dennis, T. Li, and V. Smith, “Heterogeneity for the Win: One-
Shot Federated Clustering,” in Proceedings of the 38th International
Conference on Machine Learning.
PMLR, Jul. 2021, pp. 2611–2620,
iSSN: 2640-3498.
[232] Y.-Y. Hsieh, Y.-C. Lee, and C.-H. Yang, “A cyclegan accelerator for
unsupervised learning on mobile devices,” in Proceedings - IEEE
International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, vol. 2020-October,
2020.
[233] S. Muthu, R. Tennakoon, R. Hoseinnezhad, and A. Bab-Hadiashar,
“Unsupervised video object segmentation: an affinity and edge learning
approach,” International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernet-
ics, 2022.
[234] D. Piyasena, M. Thathsara, S. Kanagarajah, S. Lam, and M. Wu,
“Dynamically Growing Neural Network Architecture for Lifelong Deep
Learning on the Edge,” in Proceedings - 30th International Conference
on Field-Programmable Logic and Applications, FPL 2020, 2020, pp.
262–268.
[235] Z. Li, Z. Chen, X. Wei, S. Gao, C. Ren, and T. Quek, “HPFL-CN:
Communication-Efficient Hierarchical Personalized Federated Edge
Learning via Complex Network Feature Clustering,” in Annual IEEE
Communications Society Conference on Sensor, Mesh and Ad Hoc
Communications and Networks workshops, vol. 2022-September, 2022,
pp. 325–333.
[236] B. Gong, T. Xing, Z. Liu, W. Xi, and X. Chen, “Towards Hierar-
chical Clustered Federated Learning with Model Stability on Mobile
Devices,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, pp. 1–17, 2023.
[237] O. Ayg¨un, M. Kazemi, D. G¨und¨uz, and T. Duman, “Hierarchical Over-
the-Air Federated Edge Learning,” in ICC 2022 - IEEE International
Conference on Communications, vol. 2022-May, 2022, pp. 3376–3381.
[238] J. Yan, J. Liu, and Z.-Y. Zhang, “CCFC: Bridging Federated Clustering
and Contrastive Learning,” Jan. 2024, arXiv:2401.06634 [cs].
[239] J. Yan, J. Liu, Y.-Z. Ning, and Z.-Y. Zhang, “CCFC++: Enhanc-
ing Federated Clustering through Feature Decorrelation,” Feb. 2024,
arXiv:2402.12852 [cs].
[240] J. Yan, J. Liu, J. Qi, and Z.-Y. Zhang, “Privacy-Preserving Federated
Deep Clustering based on GAN,” Oct. 2023, arXiv:2211.16965 [cs].
[241] M.
Stallmann
and
A.
Wilbik,
“Towards
Federated
Clustering:
A Federated Fuzzy $c$-Means Algorithm (FFCM),” Jan. 2022,
arXiv:2201.07316 [cs].
[242] W. Zhuang, Y. Wen, and S. Zhang, “Joint Optimization in Edge-Cloud
Continuum for Federated Unsupervised Person Re-identification,” in
MM 2021 - Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on
Multimedia, 2021, pp. 433–441.
[243] N. Lu, Z. Wang, X. Li, G. Niu, Q. Dou, and M. Sugiyama, “Federated
Learning from only Unlabeled Data with Class-Conditional-Sharing
Clients,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.03304, 2022.
[244] K. Sivamayil, E. Rajasekar, B. Aljafari, S. Nikolovski, S. Vairavasun-
daram, and I. Vairavasundaram, “A systematic study on reinforcement
learning based applications,” Energies, vol. 16, no. 3, 2023.
[245] M. Naeem, S. T. H. Rizvi, and A. Coronato, “A gentle introduction
to reinforcement learning and its application in different fields,” IEEE
Access, vol. 8, pp. 209 320–209 344, 2020.
[246] S.-C. Kao and T. Krishna, “E3: A HW/SW Co-design Neuroevolution
Platform for Autonomous Learning in Edge Device,” in Proceedings
- 2021 IEEE International Symposium on Performance Analysis of
Systems and Software, ISPASS 2021, 2021, pp. 288–298.
[247] H. H. Zhuo, W. Feng, Y. Lin, Q. Xu, and Q. Yang, “Federated deep
reinforcement learning,” 2020.
[248] J. Qi, Q. Zhou, L. Lei, and K. Zheng, “Federated reinforcement
learning: techniques, applications, and open challenges,” Intelligence
& Robotics, 2021.
[249] Y. Xianjia, J. Queralta, J. Heikkonen, and T. Westerlund, “Federated
Learning in Robotic and Autonomous Systems,” in Procedia Computer
Science, vol. 191, 2021, pp. 135–142.
[250] C. Nadiger, A. Kumar, and S. Abdelhak, “Federated reinforcement
learning for fast personalization,” in 2019 IEEE Second International
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Knowledge Engineering
(AIKE), 2019, Conference paper, p. 123 – 127, cited by: 49.
[251] W. Xiong, Q. Liu, F. Li, B. Wang, and F. Zhu, “Personalized federated
reinforcement learning: Balancing personalization and experience shar-
ing via distance constraint[formula presented],” Expert Systems with
Applications, vol. 238, 2024, cited by: 0.
[252] A. Jarwan and M. Ibnkahla, “Edge-Based Federated Deep Reinforce-
ment Learning for IoT Traffic Management,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 3799–3813, 2023.
[253] X. Wang, C. Wang, X. Li, V. C. M. Leung, and T. Taleb, “Federated
deep reinforcement learning for internet of things with decentralized
cooperative edge caching,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7,
no. 10, pp. 9441–9455, 2020.
[254] T. Liu, T. Zhang, J. Loo, and Y. Wang, “Deep Reinforcement Learning-
Based Resource Allocation for UAV-Enabled Federated Edge Learn-
ing,” Journal of Communications and Information Networks, vol. 8,
no. 1, 2023.
[255] G. Rjoub, O. Wahab, J. Bentahar, and A. Bataineh, “Trust-driven
reinforcement selection strategy for federated learning on IoT devices,”
Computing, 2022.
[256] P. Tam, I. Song, S. Kang, and S. Kim, “Privacy-Aware Intelligent
Healthcare Services with Federated Learning Architecture and Rein-
forcement Learning Agent,” in Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering,
vol. 1028 LNEE, 2023, pp. 583–590.
[257] M. Xu, D. Niyato, Z. Yang, Z. Xiong, J. Kang, D. Kim, and X. Shen,
“Privacy-Preserving Intelligent Resource Allocation for Federated Edge
Learning in Quantum Internet,” IEEE Journal on Selected Topics in
Signal Processing, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 142–157, 2023.
[258] C. Peng, Q. Hu, Z. Wang, R. Liu, and Z. Xiong, “Online-Learning-
Based Fast-Convergent and Energy-Efficient Device Selection in Fed-
erated Edge Learning,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 10, no. 6,
pp. 5571–5582, 2023.
[259] D. Zhang, W. Sun, Z.-A. Zheng, W. Chen, and S. He, “Adaptive device
sampling and deadline determination for cloud-based heterogeneous
federated learning,” Journal of Cloud Computing, vol. 12, no. 1, 2023.
[260] N. Zhao, Y. Pei, Y.-C. Liang, and D. Niyato, “Multi-Agent Deep
Reinforcement Learning Based Incentive Mechanism for Multi-Task
Federated Edge Learning,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technol-
ogy, vol. 72, no. 10, pp. 13 530–13 535, 2023.
[261] H. Watanabe, M. Tsukada, and H. Matsutani, “An FPGA-Based On-
Device Reinforcement Learning Approach using Online Sequential
Learning,” in 2021 IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Pro-
cessing Symposium Workshops, IPDPSW 2021 - In conjunction with
IEEE IPDPS 2021, 2021, pp. 96–103.
[262] K. Rakesh, L. Kumar, R. Mittar, P. Chakraborty, P. Ankush, and
S. Gairuboina, “DNN based adaptive video streaming using combi-
nation of supervised learning and reinforcement learning,” in Commu-
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST XXXX
27
nications in Computer and Information Science, vol. 1148 CCIS, 2020,
pp. 143–154.
[263] H. Zhang, A. Zhou, and H. Ma, “Reinforcement learning-based real-
time video streaming control and on-device training research,” Chinese
Journal on Internet of Things, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 1–13, 2022.
[264] M. Alshiekh, R. Bloem, R. Ehlers, B. K¨onighofer, S. Niekum, and
U. Topcu, “Safe reinforcement learning via shielding,” CoRR, vol.
abs/1708.08611, 2017.
[265] T. Sen and H. Shen, “Distributed Training for Deep Learning Models
On An Edge Computing Network Using Shielded Reinforcement
Learning,” in Proceedings - International Conference on Distributed
Computing Systems, vol. 2022-July, 2022, pp. 581–591.
[266] J. E. Van Engelen and H. H. Hoos, “A survey on semi-supervised
learning,” Machine learning, vol. 109, no. 2, pp. 373–440, 2020.
[267] J. Park, J. Kwak, K. Kim, S.-S. Lee, and S.-J. Jang, “Semi-Supervised
Learning using Sequential Data for Mobile Applications,” in 2022 IEEE
International Conference on Consumer Electronics-Asia, ICCE-Asia
2022, 2022.
[268] X. Pei, X. Deng, S. Tian, L. Zhang, and K. Xue, “A Knowledge
Transfer-Based Semi-Supervised Federated Learning for IoT Malware
Detection,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing,
vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 2127–2143, 2023.
[269] A. Albaseer, B. Ciftler, M. Abdallah, and A. Al-Fuqaha, “Exploiting
Unlabeled Data in Smart Cities using Federated Edge Learning,” in
2020 International Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing,
IWCMC 2020, 2020, pp. 1666–1671.
[270] M. Tsukada, M. Kondo, and H. Matsutani, “A neural network-based on-
device learning anomaly detector for edge devices,” IEEE Transactions
on Computers, vol. 69, no. 7, pp. 1027–1044, 2020.
[271] S. Zhao, D. Wu, J. Yang, and M. Sawan, “A Resource-Efficient
and Data-Restricted Training Method Towards Neurological Symptoms
Prediction,” in BioCAS 2022 - IEEE Biomedical Circuits and Systems
Conference: Intelligent Biomedical Systems for a Better Future, Pro-
ceedings, 2022, pp. 615–619.
[272] D. Hou, R. Hou, and J. Hou, “On-device Training for Breast Ultrasound
Image Classification,” in 2020 10th Annual Computing and Communi-
cation Workshop and Conference, CCWC 2020, 2020, pp. 78–82.
[273] M. Wu, H. Matsutani, and M. Kondo, “ONLAD-IDS: ONLAD-
Based Intrusion Detection System Using SmartNIC,” in Proceed-
ings - 24th IEEE International Conference on High Performance
Computing and Communications, 8th IEEE International Conference
on Data Science and Systems, 20th IEEE International Conference
on Smart City and 8th IEEE International Conference on Depend-
ability in Sensor, Cloud and Big Data Systems and Application,
HPCC/DSS/SmartCity/DependSys 2022, 2022, pp. 546–553.
[274] V. Radu, P. Katsikouli, R. Sarkar, and M. Marina, “A semi-supervised
learning approach for robust indoor-outdoor detection with smart-
phones,” in SenSys 2014 - Proceedings of the 12th ACM Conference
on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems, 2014, pp. 280–294.
[275] R. Balestriero, M. Ibrahim, V. Sobal, A. Morcos, S. Shekhar, T. Gold-
stein, F. Bordes, A. Bardes, G. Mialon, Y. Tian et al., “A cookbook of
self-supervised learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.12210, 2023.
[276] Y. Gaol, J. Fernandez-Marques, T. Parcollet, P. De Gusmao, and
N. Lane, “Match to Win: Analysing Sequences Lengths for Efficient
Self-Supervised Learning in Speech and Audio,” in 2022 IEEE Spoken
Language Technology Workshop, SLT 2022 - Proceedings, 2023, pp.
115–122.
[277] Z. Huo, D. Hwang, K. Sim, S. Garg, A. Misra, N. Siddhartha,
T.
Strohman,
and
F.
Beaufays,
“Incremental
Layer-Wise
Self-
Supervised Learning for Efficient Unsupervised Speech Domain Adap-
tation On Device,” in Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the
International Speech Communication Association, INTERSPEECH,
vol. 2022-September, 2022, pp. 4845–4849.
[278] J. Liu, X. Yu, and T. Rosing, “Self-Train: Self-Supervised On-Device
Training for Post-Deployment Adaptation,” in Proceedings - 2022 IEEE
International Conference on Smart Internet of Things, SmartIoT 2022,
2022, pp. 161–168.
[279] J. Shi, Y. Wu, D. Zeng, J. Tao, J. Hu, and Y. Shi, “Self-Supervised
On-Device Federated Learning From Unlabeled Streams,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems,
vol. 42, no. 12, pp. 4871–4882, 2023.
[280] Y. Wu, Z. Wang, D. Zeng, Y. Shi, and J. Hu, “Enabling On-Device
Self-Supervised Contrastive Learning with Selective Data Contrast,”
in Proceedings - Design Automation Conference, vol. 2021-December,
2021, pp. 655–660.
[281] Y. Wu, D. Zeng, Z. Wang, Y. Sheng, L. Yang, A. James, Y. Shi,
and J. Hu, “Federated Contrastive Learning for Dermatological Dis-
ease Diagnosis via On-device Learning,” in IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Computer-Aided Design, Digest of Technical Papers,
ICCAD, vol. 2021-November, 2021.
[282] F. Kitsios, M. Kamariotou, A. I. Syngelakis, and M. A. Talias, “Recent
Advances of Artificial Intelligence in Healthcare: A Systematic Litera-
ture Review,” Applied Sciences, vol. 13, no. 13, p. 7479, January 2023,
number: 13 Publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute.
[283] A. Qayyum, J. Qadir, M. Bilal, and A. I. Al-Fuqaha, “Secure and
robust machine learning for healthcare: A survey,” IEEE Reviews in
Biomedical Engineering, vol. 14, pp. 156–180, 2020.
[284] A. Zainuddin, “Artificial Intelligence and Machine learning in the
Healthcare Sector: A Review,” Malaysian Journal of Science and
Advanced Technology, July 2021.
[285] E. Petersen, Y. Potdevin, E. Mohammadi, S. Zidowitz, S. Breyer,
D. Nowotka, S. Henn, L. Pechmann, M. Leucker, P. Rostalski, and
C. Herzog, “Responsible and regulatory conform machine learning for
medicine: A survey of challenges and solutions,” IEEE Access, vol. 10,
p. 58375–58418, 2022.
[286] A. Qayyum, K. Ahmad, M. A. Ahsan, A. Al-Fuqaha, and J. Qadir,
“Collaborative
Federated
Learning
for
Healthcare:
Multi-Modal
COVID-19 Diagnosis at the Edge,” IEEE Open Journal of the Com-
puter Society, vol. 3, pp. 172–184, 2022, conference Name: IEEE Open
Journal of the Computer Society.
[287] Z. Lian, Q. Yang, W. Wang, Q. Zeng, M. Alazab, H. Zhao, and
C. Su, “DEEP-FEL: Decentralized, Efficient and Privacy-Enhanced
Federated Edge Learning for Healthcare Cyber Physical Systems,”
IEEE Transactions on Network Science and Engineering, vol. 9, no. 5,
pp. 3558–3569, September 2022, conference Name: IEEE Transactions
on Network Science and Engineering.
[288] Y. Guo, F. Liu, Z. Cai, L. Chen, and N. Xiao, “FEEL: A Federated
Edge Learning System for Efficient and Privacy-Preserving Mobile
Healthcare,” in Proceedings of the 49th International Conference on
Parallel Processing, ser. ICPP ’20.
New York, NY, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, August 2020, pp. 1–11.
[289] A. Chaddad, Y. Wu, and C. Desrosiers, “Federated Learning for
Healthcare Applications,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 11,
no. 5, pp. 7339–7358, Mar. 2024.
[290] J. Zhou, L. Zhou, D. Wang, X. Xu, H. Li, Y. Chu, W. Han, and
X. Gao, “Personalized and privacy-preserving federated heterogeneous
medical image analysis with PPPML-HMI,” Computers in Biology and
Medicine, vol. 169, p. 107861, Feb. 2024.
[291] S. Bahri, N. Zoghlami, M. Abed, and J. M. R. S. Tavares, “Big data
for healthcare: A survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 7397–7408, 2019.
[292] A. Qayyum, K. Ahmad, M. A. Ahsan, A. Al-Fuqaha, and J. Qadir,
“Collaborative
Federated
Learning
for
Healthcare:
Multi-Modal
COVID-19 Diagnosis at the Edge,” IEEE Open Journal of the Com-
puter Society, vol. 3, pp. 172–184, 2022.
[293] S. Hakak, S. Ray, W. Z. Khan, and E. Scheme, “A Framework for
Edge-Assisted Healthcare Data Analytics using Federated Learning,”
in IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), Dec. 2020,
pp. 3423–3427.
[294] J. Chen, Y. Zheng, Y. Liang, Z. Zhan, M. Jiang, X. Zhang, D. Da Silva,
W. Wu, and V. De Albuquerque, “Edge2Analysis: A Novel AIoT
Platform for Atrial Fibrillation Recognition and Detection,” IEEE
Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, vol. 26, no. 12, pp.
5772–5782, 2022.
[295] V. Chandrika and S. Surendran, “Incremental Machine Learning Model
for Fetal Health Risk Prediction,” in 2022 International Conference
on Smart Generation Computing, Communication and Networking,
SMART GENCON 2022, 2022.
[296] T. Ravi Shanker Reddy and B. Beena, “AI Integrated Blockchain Tech-
nology for Secure Health Care—Consent-Based Secured Federated
Transfer Learning for Predicting COVID-19 on Wearable Devices,” in
Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems, vol. 473, 2023, pp. 345–356.
[297] D. H. O. Sharan, “Advancements and future directions in human
activity recognition,” International Journal For Science Technology
And Engineering, 2023.
[298] M. Stojchevska, M. De Brouwer, M. Courteaux, F. Ongenae, and
S. Van Hoecke, “From lab to real world: Assessing the effectiveness of
human activity recognition and optimization through personalization,”
Sensors, vol. 23, no. 10, 2023.
[299] C.-Y. Lin and R. Marculescu, “Model Personalization for Human
Activity Recognition,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference on
Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops (PerCom Work-
shops), March 2020, pp. 1–7.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST XXXX
28
[300] X. Ouyang, Z. Xie, J. Zhou, G. Xing, and J. Huang, “Clusterfl: A
clustering-based federated learning system for human activity recogni-
tion,” ACM Trans. Sen. Netw., vol. 19, no. 1, dec 2022.
[301] M. Craighero, D. Quarantiello, B. Rossi, D. Carrera, P. Fragneto,
and G. Boracchi, “On-Device Personalization for Human Activity
Recognition on STM32,” IEEE Embedded Systems Letters, pp. 1–1,
2023.
[302] M. M. Kamruzzaman, “New Opportunities, Challenges, and Applica-
tions of Edge-AI for Connected Healthcare in Smart Cities,” in 2021
IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), December 2021, pp. 1–6.
[303] A. M. Hayajneh, S. A. Aldalahmeh, F. Alasali, H. Al-Obiedollah,
S. A. Zaidi, and D. McLernon, “Tiny machine learning on the edge: A
framework for transfer learning empowered unmanned aerial vehicle
assisted smart farming,” IET Smart Cities, 2023, type: Article.
[304] B. Nour, S. Cherkaoui, and Z. Mlika, “Federated Learning and
Proactive Computation Reuse at the Edge of Smart Homes,” IEEE
Transactions on Network Science and Engineering, vol. 9, no. 5, pp.
3045 – 3056, 2022, type: Article.
[305] K. Rajamohan, S. Rangasamy, A. Abreo, R. Upadhyay, and R. Sabu,
“Smart cities: Redefining urban life through iot,” Advances in systems
analysis, software engineering, and high performance computing book
series, 2023.
[306] J. Na, H. Zhang, X. Deng, B. Zhang, and Z. Ye, “Accelerate personal-
ized iot service provision by cloud-aided edge reinforcement learning:
A case study on smart lighting,” in Lecture Notes in Computer Science
(including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture
Notes in Bioinformatics), vol. 12571 LNCS, 2020, pp. 69–84.
[307] J. M. Aguiar-Perez and M. A. Perez-Juarez, “An insight of deep
learning based demand forecasting in smart grids,” Sensors, vol. 23,
no. 3, 2023.
[308] J. Jithish, B. Alangot, N. Mahalingam, and K. S. Yeo, “Distributed
Anomaly Detection in Smart Grids: A Federated Learning-Based
Approach,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 7157 – 7179, 2023, type: Article.
[309] A. Taik, B. Nour, and S. Cherkaoui, “Empowering Prosumer Com-
munities in Smart Grid with Wireless Communications and Federated
Edge Learning,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 26
– 33, 2021, type: Article.
[310] W. Lei, H. Wen, J. Wu, and W. Hou, “MADDPG-based security
situational awareness for smart grid with intelligent edge,” Applied
Sciences (Switzerland), vol. 11, no. 7, 2021.
[311] N. N. T. Huu, L. Mai, and T. V. Minh, “Detecting Abnormal and
Dangerous Activities Using Artificial Intelligence on the Edge for
Smart City Application,” in Proceedings - 2021 15th International
Conference on Advanced Computing and Applications, ACOMP 2021,
2021, pp. 85 – 92, type: Conference paper.
[312] C. Bian, Y. Xu, L. Wang, H. Gu, and F. Zhou, “Abnormal behavior
recognition based on edge feature and 3D convolutional neural net-
work,” in Proceedings - 2020 35th Youth Academic Annual Conference
of Chinese Association of Automation, YAC 2020, 2020, pp. 661 – 666,
type: Conference paper.
[313] D. Yuan, X. Zhu, Y. Mao, B. Zheng, and T. Wu, “Privacy-Preserving
Pedestrian Detection for Smart City with Edge Computing,” in 2019
11th International Conference on Wireless Communications and Signal
Processing, WCSP 2019, 2019, type: Conference paper.
[314] S. Pandiyan and J. Rajasekharan, “Federated Learning vs Edge Learn-
ing for Hot Water Demand Forecasting in Distributed Electric Water
Heaters for Demand Side Flexibility Aggregation,” in 2023 IEEE PES
Grid Edge Technologies Conference and Exposition, Grid Edge 2023,
2023.
[315] A. Jaleel, M. Hassan, T. Mahmood, M. Ghani, and A. Ur Rehman,
“Reducing congestion in an intelligent traffic system with collaborative
and adaptive signaling on the edge,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 205 396–
205 410, 2020.
[316] G. Constantinou, G. Sankar Ramachandran, A. Alfarrarjeh, S. H. Kim,
B. Krishnamachari, and C. Shahabi, “A crowd-based image learning
framework using edge computing for smart city applications,” in
Proceedings - 2019 IEEE 5th International Conference on Multimedia
Big Data, BigMM 2019, 2019, pp. 11 – 20, type: Conference paper.
[317] B. Qolomany, K. Ahmad, A. Al-Fuqaha, and J. Qadir, “Particle
Swarm Optimized Federated Learning for Industrial IoT and Smart
City Services,” in 2020 IEEE Global Communications Conference,
GLOBECOM 2020 - Proceedings, 2020, type: Conference paper.
[318] D. Liu, E. Cui, Y. Shen, P. Ding, and Z. Zhang, “Federated Learning
Model Training Mechanism with Edge Cloud Collaboration for Ser-
vices in Smart Cities,” in IEEE International Symposium on Broadband
Multimedia Systems and Broadcasting, BMSB, vol. 2023-June, 2023,
type: Conference paper.
[319] L. Zhang, J. Wu, S. Mumtaz, J. Li, H. Gacanin, and J. J. P. C.
Rodrigues, “Edge-to-edge cooperative artificial intelligence in smart
cities with on-demand learning offloading,” in 2019 IEEE Global
Communications Conference, GLOBECOM 2019 - Proceedings, 2019,
type: Conference paper.
[320] Machine Learning Enabled Smart Farming:The Demand of the Time,
2022.
[321] I. Sharma, A. Sharma, and S. K. Gupta, “Autonomous vehicles: Open-
source technologies, considerations, and development,” Advances in
Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning, pp. 105–109, 2023.
[322] B. Yang, X. Cao, X. Li, C. Yuen, and L. Qian, “Lessons Learned from
Accident of Autonomous Vehicle Testing: An Edge Learning-Aided
Offloading Framework,” IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, vol. 9,
no. 8, pp. 1182–1186, 2020.
[323] I. Sharma, A. Sharma, and S. K. Gupta, “Asynchronous and Syn-
chronous Federated Learning-based UAVs,” in 2023 Third International
Symposium on Instrumentation, Control, Artificial Intelligence, and
Robotics (ICA-SYMP), January 2023, pp. 105–109.
[324] J. Chen, O. Esrafilian, H. Bayerlein, D. Gesbert, and M. Caccamo,
“Model-aided Federated Reinforcement Learning for Multi-UAV Tra-
jectory Planning in IoT Networks,” arXiv.org, vol. abs/2306.02029,
June 2023.
[325] S. Chen and K. Mai, “Towards Specialized Hardware for Learning-
based Visual Odometry on the Edge,” in IEEE International Confer-
ence on Intelligent Robots and Systems, vol. 2022-October, 2022, pp.
10 603–10 610.
[326] Y. Dang, C. Benzaid, B. Yang, T. Taleb, and Y. Shen, “Deep-Ensemble-
Learning-Based GPS Spoofing Detection for Cellular-Connected
UAVs,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 9, no. 24, pp. 25 068–
25 085, 2022.
[327] V. Sharma, P. Saikia, S. Singh, K. Singh, W.-J. Huang, and S. Biswas,
“FEEL-enhanced Edge Computing in Energy Constrained UAV-aided
IoT Networks,” in IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking
Conference, WCNC, vol. 2023-March, 2023.
[328] J. Liu, Z. Xu, and Z. Wen, “Joint Data Transmission and Trajectory
Optimization in UAV-Enabled Wireless Powered Mobile Edge Learn-
ing Systems,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 72,
no. 9, pp. 11 617–11 630, 2023.
[329] Z. Zhao, L. Pacheco, H. Santos, M. Liu, A. Maio, D. Rosari,
E. Cerqueira, T. Braun, and X. Cao, “Predictive UAV Base Station
Deployment and Service Offloading with Distributed Edge Learning,”
IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management, vol. 18, no. 4,
pp. 3955–3972, 2021.
[330] Y. Ding, Y. Feng, W. Lu, S. Zheng, N. Zhao, L. Meng, A. Nallanathan,
and X. Yang, “Online Edge Learning Offloading and Resource Manage-
ment for UAV-Assisted MEC Secure Communications,” IEEE Journal
on Selected Topics in Signal Processing, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 54–65,
2023.
[331] S. Tang, W. Zhou, L. Chen, L. Lai, J. Xia, and L. Fan, “Battery-
constrained federated edge learning in UAV-enabled IoT for B5G/6G
networks,” Physical Communication, vol. 47, 2021.
[332] J. Li, X. Liu, and T. Mahmoodi, “Opportunistic Transmission
of Distributed Learning Models in Mobile UAVs,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.09484, June 2023.
[333] G. Cappello, G. Colajanni, P. Daniele, L. Galluccio, C. Grasso,
G. Schembra, and L. Scrimali, “ODEL: an On-Demand Edge-Learning
framework exploiting Flying Ad-hoc NETworks (FANETs),” in Pro-
ceedings of the International Symposium on Mobile Ad Hoc Networking
and Computing (MobiHoc), 2023, pp. 394–399.
[334] D. Selvaraj, C. Vitale, T. Panayiotou, P. Kolios, C. Chiasserini, and
G. Ellinas, “Edge Learning of Vehicular Trajectories at Regulated
Intersections,” in IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference, vol. 2021-
September, 2021.
[335] S. Zhang, S. Zhang, and L. Yeung, “Energy-efficient Federated Edge
Learning for Internet of Vehicles via Rate-Splitting Multiple Access,”
in Proceedings of the International Symposium on Wireless Communi-
cation Systems, vol. 2022-October, 2022.
[336] H. Werthner, H. R. Hansen, and F. Ricci, “Recommender systems,” in
2007 40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
(HICSS’07), vol. 1.
IEEE Computer Society, 2007, pp. 167–167.
[337] X. Xin, J. Yang, H. Wang, J. Ma, P. Ren, H. Luo, X. Shi, Z. Chen,
and Z. Ren, “On the user behavior leakage from recommender system
exposure,” ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., vol. 41, no. 3, feb 2023.
[338] P. M¨ullner, User Privacy in Recommender Systems.
Springer Nature
Switzerland, 2023.
[339] L. Yang, B. Tan, V. Zheng, K. Chen, and Q. Yang, “Federated Rec-
ommendation Systems,” Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST XXXX
29
subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in
Bioinformatics), vol. 12500 LNCS, pp. 225–239, 2020.
[340] K. Muhammad, Q. Wang, D. O’Reilly-Morgan, E. Tragos, B. Smyth,
N. Hurley, J. Geraci, and A. Lawlor, “FedFast: Going beyond Average
for Faster Training of Federated Recommender Systems,” in Proceed-
ings of the ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining, 2020, pp. 1234–1242.
[341] Z. Liu, L. Yang, Z. Fan, H. Peng, and P. Yu, “Federated Social
Recommendation with Graph Neural Network,” ACM Transactions on
Intelligent Systems and Technology, vol. 13, no. 4, 2022.
[342] S. Wei, S. Meng, Q. Li, X. Zhou, L. Qi, and X. Xu, “Edge-
enabled federated sequential recommendation with knowledge-aware
Transformer,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 148, pp. 610–
622, 2023.
[343] S. Wang, L. Hu, Y. Wang, L. Cao, Q. Z. Sheng, and M. Orgun,
“Sequential recommender systems: challenges, progress and prospects,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.04830, 2019.
[344] F. Zhu, Y. Wang, C. Chen, J. Zhou, L. Li, and G. Liu, “Cross-domain
recommendation: Challenges, progress, and prospects,” 2021.
[345] H. Hu, G. Dobbie, Z. Salcic, M. Liu, J. Zhang, L. Lyu, and X. Zhang,
“Differentially private locality sensitive hashing based federated rec-
ommender system,” Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Ex-
perience, vol. 35, no. 14, p. e6233, 2023.
[346] Y. Guo, F. Liu, Z. Cai, H. Zeng, L. Chen, T. Zhou, and N. Xiao, “PRE-
FER: Point-of-interest REcommendation with efficiency and privacy-
preservation via Federated Edge leaRning,” Proceedings of the ACM
on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, vol. 5,
no. 1, 2021.
[347] L. Yang, J. Zhang, D. Chai, L. Wang, K. Guo, K. Chen, and Q. Yang,
“Practical and Secure Federated Recommendation with Personalized
Masks,” pp. 33–45, 2023.
[348] F. Liang, W. Pan, and Z. Ming, “FedRec++: Lossless Federated
Recommendation with Explicit Feedback,” Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 4224–4231,
May 2021, number: 5.
[349] Y. Du, D. Zhou, Y. Xie, J. Shi, and M. Gong, “Federated matrix
factorization for privacy-preserving recommender systems,” Applied
Soft Computing, vol. 111, p. 107700, November 2021.
[350] M. Dogra, B. Meher, P. Mani, and H.-K. Min, “Memory Efficient
Federated Recommendation Model,” in Proceedings - 16th IEEE
International Conference on Semantic Computing, ICSC 2022, 2022,
pp. 139–142.
[351] T. Liu and Y. Sugano, “Interactive Machine Learning on Edge De-
vices With User-in-the-Loop Sample Recommendation,” IEEE Access,
vol. 10, pp. 107 346–107 360, 2022.
[352] J. Qin, X. Zhang, B. Liu, and J. Qian, “A split-federated learning
and edge-cloud based efficient and privacy-preserving large-scale item
recommendation model,” Journal of Cloud Computing, vol. 12, no. 1,
2023.
[353] F. Wang, J. Liu, C. Zhang, L. Sun, and K. Hwang, “Intelligent
Edge Learning for Personalized Crowdsourced Livecast: Challenges,
Opportunities, and Solutions,” IEEE Network, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 170–
176, 2021.
[354] S. Karpinskyj, F. Zambetta, and L. Cavedon, “Video game personalisa-
tion techniques: A comprehensive survey,” Entertainment Computing,
vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 211–218, 2014.
[355] A. Bodas, B. Upadhyay, C. Nadiger, and S. Abdelhak, “Reinforcement
learning for game personalization on edge devices,” in 2018 Interna-
tional Conference on Information and Computer Technologies (ICICT),
2018, pp. 119–122.
[356] A. Hard, K. Partridge, C. Nguyen, N. Subrahmanya, A. Shah, P. Zhu,
I. Moreno, and R. Mathews, “Training keyword spotting models on
Non-IID data with federated learning,” in Proceedings of the Annual
Conference of the International Speech Communication Association,
INTERSPEECH, vol. 2020-October, 2020, pp. 4343–4347.
[357] I. Zualkernan, S. Dhou, J. Judas, A. Sajun, B. Gomez, and L. Hussain,
“An IoT System Using Deep Learning to Classify Camera Trap Images
on the Edge,” Computers, vol. 11, no. 1, 2022.
[358] H. Wang, F. Li, W. Mo, P. Tao, H. Shen, Y. Wu, Y. Zhang, and F. Deng,
“Novel Cloud-Edge Collaborative Detection Technique for Detecting
Defects in PV Components, Based on Transfer Learning,” Energies,
vol. 15, no. 21, 2022.
[359] U. Chinchole and S. Raut, “Federated Learning For Estimating Air
Quality,” in 2021 12th International Conference on Computing Com-
munication and Networking Technologies, ICCCNT 2021, 2021.
[360] Y. Chen, L. Chen, C. Hong, and X. Wang, “Federated Multitask Learn-
ing with Manifold Regularization for Face Spoof Attack Detection,”
Mathematical Problems in Engineering, vol. 2022, 2022.
[361] N. Soures, D. Kudithipudi, R. B. Jacobs-Gedrim, S. Agarwal, and
M. Marinella, “Enabling On-Device Learning with Deep Spiking
Neural Networks for Speech Recognition,” ECS Transactions, vol. 85,
no. 6, p. 127, April 2018, publisher: IOP Publishing.
[362] K. Sim, A. Chandorkar, F. Gao, M. Chua, T. Munkhdalai, and F. Bea-
ufays, “Robust continuous on-device personalization for automatic
speech recognition,” in Proceedings of the Annual Conference of
the International Speech Communication Association, INTERSPEECH,
vol. 6, 2021, pp. 4451–4455.
[363] J. Park, S. Jin, J. Park, S. Kim, D. Sandhyana, C. Lee, M. Han,
J. Lee, S. Jung, C. Han, and C. Kim, “Conformer-Based on-Device
Streaming Speech Recognition with KD Compression and Two-Pass
Architecture,” in 2022 IEEE Spoken Language Technology Workshop,
SLT, 2023, pp. 92–99.
[364] S. Pillay, A. MacDonald, R. Brito, H. Burd, G. O’Shea, A. Higginson,
and M. Faragalli, “Federated Learning on Edge Devices in a Lunar
Analogue Environment,” in International Geoscience and Remote
Sensing Symposium (IGARSS), vol. 2023-July, 2023, pp. 2006–2009.
[365] Q. Zhang, X. Che, Y. Chen, X. Ma, M. Xu, S. Dustdar, X. Liu, and
S. Wang, “A Comprehensive Deep Learning Library Benchmark and
Optimal Library Selection,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing,
pp. 1–14, 2023, conference Name: IEEE Transactions on Mobile
Computing.
[366] D. J. Beutel, T. Topal, A. Mathur, X. Qiu, J. Fernandez-Marques,
Y. Gao, L. Sani, K. H. Li, T. Parcollet, P. P. B. de Gusm˜ao, and N. D.
Lane, “Flower: A Friendly Federated Learning Research Framework,”
March 2022, arXiv:2007.14390 [cs, stat].
[367] C. He, S. Li, J. So, X. Zeng, M. Zhang, H. Wang, X. Wang,
P. Vepakomma, A. Singh, H. Qiu, X. Zhu, J. Wang, L. Shen, P. Zhao,
Y. Kang, Y. Liu, R. Raskar, Q. Yang, M. Annavaram, and S. Aves-
timehr, “FedML: A Research Library and Benchmark for Federated
Machine Learning,” July 2020.
[368] A. Ziller, A. Trask, A. Lopardo, B. Szymkow, B. Wagner, E. Bluemke,
J.-M. Nounahon, J. Passerat-Palmbach, K. Prakash, N. Rose, T. Ryffel,
Z. N. Reza, and G. Kaissis, “PySyft: A Library for Easy Federated
Learning,” in Federated Learning Systems: Towards Next-Generation
AI, ser. Studies in Computational Intelligence, M. H. u. Rehman and
M. M. Gaber, Eds.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2021,
pp. 111–139.
[369] A. Borthakur, A. Manna, A. Kasliwal, D. Dewan, and D. Sheet,
“FedERA: Framework for Federated Learning with Diversified Edge
Resource Allocation,” Authorea Preprints, September 2023.
[370] D. Zeng, S. Liang, X. Hu, H. Wang, and Z. Xu, “FedLab: A Flex-
ible Federated Learning Framework,” Journal of Machine Learning
Research, vol. 24, no. 100, pp. 1–7, 2023.
[371] J. H. Ro, A. T. Suresh, and K. Wu, “Fedjax: Federated learning
simulation with jax,” 2021.
[372] S. Caldas, S. M. K. Duddu, P. Wu, T. Li, J. Koneˇcn´y, H. B. McMahan,
V. Smith, and A. Talwalkar, “LEAF: A Benchmark for Federated
Settings,” December 2019, arXiv:1812.01097 [cs, stat].
[373] M. H. Garcia, A. Manoel, D. M. Diaz, F. Mireshghallah, R. Sim,
and D. Dimitriadis, “Flute: A scalable, extensible framework for high-
performance federated learning simulations,” 2022.
[374] D. Romanini, A. J. Hall, P. Papadopoulos, T. Titcombe, A. Ismail,
T. Cebere, R. Sandmann, R. Roehm, and M. A. Hoeh, “PyVertical:
A Vertical Federated Learning Framework for Multi-headed SplitNN,”
Apr. 2021, arXiv:2104.00489 [cs].
[375] P. Foley, M. J. Sheller, B. Edwards, S. Pati, W. Riviera, M. Sharma,
P. N. Moorthy, S.-h. Wang, J. Martin, P. Mirhaji, P. Shah, and S. Bakas,
“OpenFL: the open federated learning library,” Physics in Medicine
& Biology, vol. 67, no. 21, p. 214001, Oct. 2022, publisher: IOP
Publishing.
[376] W. Zhuang, X. Gan, Y. Wen, and S. Zhang, “EasyFL: A Low-Code
Federated Learning Platform for Dummies,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, vol. 9, no. 15, pp. 13 740–13 754, Aug. 2022, conference
Name: IEEE Internet of Things Journal.
[377] K. Burlachenko, S. Horv´ath, and P. Richt´arik, “FL pytorch: optimiza-
tion research simulator for federated learning,” in Proceedings of the
2nd ACM International Workshop on Distributed Machine Learning,
December 2021, pp. 1–7.
[378] S.-S. Park, D.-H. Kim, J.-G. Kang, and K.-S. Chung, “EdgeRL: A
Light-Weight C/C++ Framework for On-Device Reinforcement Learn-
ing,” in 2021 18th International SoC Design Conference (ISOCC),
October 2021, pp. 235–236, iSSN: 2163-9612.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST XXXX
30
[379] D. Nadalini, M. Rusci, G. Tagliavini, L. Ravaglia, L. Benini, and
F. Conti, “Pulp-trainlib: Enabling on-device training for risc-v multi-
core mcus through performance-driven autotuning,” in International
Conference on Embedded Computer Systems.
Springer, 2022, pp.
200–216.
[380] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan,
T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga, A. Desmaison, A. Kopf,
E. Yang, Z. DeVito, M. Raison, A. Tejani, S. Chilamkurthy, B. Steiner,
L. Fang, J. Bai, and S. Chintala, “PyTorch: An Imperative Style,
High-Performance Deep Learning Library,” in Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, vol. 32.
Curran Associates, Inc.,
2019.
[381] M. Abadi, A. Agarwal, P. Barham, E. Brevdo, Z. Chen, C. Citro, G. S.
Corrado, A. Davis, J. Dean, M. Devin, S. Ghemawat, I. Goodfellow,
A. Harp, G. Irving, M. Isard, Y. Jia, R. Jozefowicz, L. Kaiser, M. Kud-
lur, J. Levenberg, D. Mane, R. Monga, S. Moore, D. Murray, C. Olah,
M. Schuster, J. Shlens, B. Steiner, I. Sutskever, K. Talwar, P. Tucker,
V. Vanhoucke, V. Vasudevan, F. Viegas, O. Vinyals, P. Warden, M. Wat-
tenberg, M. Wicke, Y. Yu, and X. Zheng, “TensorFlow: Large-Scale
Machine Learning on Heterogeneous Distributed Systems,” March
2016, arXiv:1603.04467 [cs].
[382] A. Aral and V. D. Maio, “Simulators and emulators for edge com-
puting,” in Edge Computing: Models, Technologies and Applications.
IET, June 2020, pp. 291–309.
[383] Q. Zhou, Z. Qu, S. Guo, B. Luo, J. Guo, Z. Xu, and R. Akerkar,
“On-Device Learning Systems for Edge Intelligence: A Software and
Hardware Synergy Perspective,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
vol. 8, no. 15, pp. 11 916–11 934, Aug. 2021.
[384] D. Marculescu, D. Stamoulis, and E. Cai, “Hardware-Aware Machine
Learning: Modeling and Optimization,” in IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Computer-Aided Design (ICCAD), Nov. 2018, pp. 1–8,
iSSN: 1558-2434.
[385] S. Dave, R. Baghdadi, T. Nowatzki, S. Avancha, A. Shrivastava,
and B. Li, “Hardware Acceleration of Sparse and Irregular Tensor
Computations of ML Models: A Survey and Insights,” Proceedings
of the IEEE, vol. 109, no. 10, pp. 1706–1752, Oct. 2021.
[386] A. Jain, H. Patel, L. Nagalapatti, N. Gupta, S. Mehta, S. Guttula,
S. Mujumdar, S. Afzal, R. Sharma Mittal, and V. Munigala, “Overview
and Importance of Data Quality for Machine Learning Tasks,” in
Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, ser. KDD ’20.
New York, NY,
USA: Association for Computing Machinery, Aug. 2020, pp. 3561–
3562.
[387] S. E. Whang, Y. Roh, H. Song, and J.-G. Lee, “Data collection and
quality challenges in deep learning: a data-centric AI perspective,” The
VLDB Journal, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 791–813, Jul. 2023.
[388] K. Ergun, R. Ayoub, P. Mercati, and T. S. Rosing, “Dynamic Reliability
Management of Multigateway IoT Edge Computing Systems,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 3864–3889, Mar. 2023.
[389] A. Aral and I. Brandic, “Dependency Mining for Service Resilience at
the Edge,” in IEEE/ACM Symposium on Edge Computing (SEC), Oct.
2018, pp. 228–242.
[390] M. D. Belgoumri, M. R. Bouadjenek, S. Aryal, and H. Hacid, “Data
Quality in Edge Machine Learning: A State-of-the-Art Survey,” Jun.
2024, arXiv:2406.02600 [cs, stat].
[391] J. Liu, J. Liu, Z. Xie, X. Ning, and D. Li, “Flame: A Self-Adaptive
Auto-Labeling System for Heterogeneous Mobile Processors,” in 6th
ACM/IEEE Symposium on Edge Computing, SEC 2021, 2021, pp. 80–
93.
[392] W. Lu, J. Cheng, X. Li, and J. He, “A Review of Solving Non-IID
Data in Federated Learning: Current Status and Future Directions,” in
Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning, H. Jin, Y. Pan, and J. Lu,
Eds.
Singapore: Springer Nature, 2024, pp. 58–72.
[393] H. Zhu, J. Xu, S. Liu, and Y. Jin, “Federated learning on non-IID data:
A survey,” Neurocomputing, vol. 465, pp. 371–390, Nov. 2021.
[394] Y. Wang, Q. Shi, and T.-H. Chang, “Why Batch Normalization Damage
Federated Learning on Non-IID Data?” IEEE Transactions on Neural
Networks and Learning Systems, pp. 1–15, 2023, conference Name:
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems.
[395] X. Li, K. Huang, W. Yang, S. Wang, and Z. Zhang, “On the Conver-
gence of FedAvg on Non-IID Data,” Jun. 2020, arXiv:1907.02189 [cs,
math, stat].
[396] V. Mothukuri, R. M. Parizi, S. Pouriyeh, Y. Huang, A. Dehghantanha,
and G. Srivastava, “A survey on security and privacy of federated
learning,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 115, pp. 619–
640, Feb. 2021.
[397] X. Yin, Y. Zhu, and J. Hu, “A Comprehensive Survey of Privacy-
preserving Federated Learning: A Taxonomy, Review, and Future
Directions,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 131:1–131:36,
Jul. 2021.
[398] Q. Xie, S. Jiang, L. Jiang, Y. Huang, Z. Zhao, S. Khan, W. Dai, Z. Liu,
and K. Wu, “Efficiency Optimization Techniques in Privacy-Preserving
Federated Learning With Homomorphic Encryption: A Brief Survey,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 11, no. 14, pp. 24 569–24 580,
Jul. 2024.
[399] H. Touvron, L. Martin, K. Stone, P. Albert, A. Almahairi, Y. Babaei,
N. Bashlykov, S. Batra, P. Bhargava, S. Bhosale et al., “Llama
2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
[400] A. Q. Jiang, A. Sablayrolles, A. Roux, A. Mensch, B. Savary, C. Bam-
ford, D. S. Chaplot, D. d. l. Casas, E. B. Hanna, F. Bressand et al.,
“Mixtral of experts,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04088, 2024.
[401] G. Team, R. Anil, S. Borgeaud, Y. Wu, J.-B. Alayrac, J. Yu, R. Soricut,
J. Schalkwyk, A. M. Dai, A. Hauth et al., “Gemini: a family of highly
capable multimodal models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805, 2023.
[402] R. Rombach, A. Blattmann, D. Lorenz, P. Esser, and B. Ommer, “High-
resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models,” 2021.
[403] H. Liu, Q. Tian, Y. Yuan, X. Liu, X. Mei, Q. Kong, Y. Wang,
W. Wang, Y. Wang, and M. D. Plumbley, “Audioldm 2: Learning holis-
tic audio generation with self-supervised pretraining,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.05734, 2023.
[404] D. Ghosal, N. Majumder, A. Mehrish, and S. Poria, “Text-to-audio
generation using instruction-tuned llm and latent diffusion model,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13731, 2023.
[405] N. Ruiz, Y. Li, V. Jampani, Y. Pritch, M. Rubinstein, and K. Aberman,
“Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-
driven generation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp. 22 500–22 510.
[406] H. R. Kirk, B. Vidgen, P. R¨ottger, and S. A. Hale, “Personalisation
within bounds: A risk taxonomy and policy framework for the align-
ment of large language models with personalised feedback,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2303.05453, 2023.
[407] N. Kshetri, “Cybercrime and privacy threats of large language models,”
IT Professional, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 9–13, 2023.
[408] H. Woisetschl¨ager, A. Isenko, S. Wang, R. Mayer, and H.-A. Jacobsen,
“Federated fine-tuning of llms on the very edge: The good, the bad,
the ugly,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03150, 2023.
[409] E. J. Hu, Y. Shen, P. Wallis, Z. Allen-Zhu, Y. Li, S. Wang, L. Wang,
and W. Chen, “Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
[410] J. Lee-Thorp, J. Ainslie, I. Eckstein, and S. Ontanon, “Fnet: Mixing
tokens with fourier transforms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.03824,
2021.
[411] G. Ramakrishnan, A. Nori, H. Murfet, and P. Cameron, “Towards
compliant data management systems for healthcare ml,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2011.07555, 2020.
[412] A. Lacoste, A. Luccioni, V. Schmidt, and T. Dandres, “Quanti-
fying the carbon emissions of machine learning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1910.09700, 2019.
[413] J. Casta˜no, S. Mart´ınez-Fern´andez, X. Franch, and J. Bogner, “Ex-
ploring the carbon footprint of hugging face’s ml models: A repository
mining study,” in 2023 ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Empir-
ical Software Engineering and Measurement (ESEM), 2023, pp. 1–12.
[414] T. Pirson and D. Bol, “Assessing the embodied carbon footprint of iot
edge devices with a bottom-up life-cycle approach,” Journal of Cleaner
Production, vol. 322, p. 128966, 2021.
[415] S. Savazzi, S. Kianoush, V. Rampa, and M. Bennis, “A framework
for energy and carbon footprint analysis of distributed and federated
edge learning,” in 2021 IEEE 32nd Annual International Symposium on
Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC). IEEE,
2021, pp. 1564–1569.
